HURRICANE PREPAREDNESS GUIDE
Office of the Attorney General Consumer Protection Division1
HURRICANE PREPAREDNESS GUIDE
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Letter from the Attorney General  ............... 3
List of Storm Names for 2024  ...................... 4
Quick Resources  .............................................. 5
Understanding the Storm  ............................. 8
Preparing for the Storm  ................................. 9
 Preparedness Checklist  .................... 11
 Hurricane Supply Checklist  ............. 12
 Have a Plan  ......................................... 13
Price Gouging  ................................................ 14
Scams at a Glance: After the Storm  .......... 16
HURRICANE PREPAREDNESS GUIDE
Office of the Attorney General Consumer Protection Division3
Dear Fellow Floridians,
As we approach another hurricane season, I am writing to you with an urgent reminder:
preparedness saves lives. With the unpredictability of nature, it is crucial that we equip
ourselves with the knowledge and resources to protect our families, homes and communities.
Last year, the 2023 Atlantic Hurricane season tied as the fourth most active season on record
with 20 named storms, including seven hurricanes.
 That is why I am pleased to present the 2024 Hurricane Preparedness Guide .
This comprehensive resource is designed to assist Floridians throughout every step of the
preparation journey, from pre-storm readiness to post-storm recovery. The guide contains
invaluable information, including:
• Preparation:  Learn how to assemble an emergency kit and secure a home to mitigate
potential damage;
• Planning:  Develop a family emergency plan to ensure everyone knows what to do and
where to go when a hurricane strikes;
• Guidance:  Benefit from practical tips and guidelines to stay informed with the latest
weather forecasts and emergency alerts; and
• Post-Storm Recovery:  Access essential resources and contacts for navigating the
recovery process and rebuilding a community.
In addition to practical tips and guidelines, the guide also includes important contact
information for emergency services and local authorities. It is a must-have resource for every
Floridian, whether a longtime resident or new to our beautiful state. Remember, preparedness
is a shared responsibility.

By taking proactive steps to prepare ourselves and our communities,
we can minimize the impact of hurricanes and ensure a faster recovery process.
I encourage everyone to review the 2024 Hurricane Preparedness Guide  thoroughly and
take action now to safeguard families and properties. Together, we can weather any storm that
comes our way.
       Stay safe Florida,
       Ashley Moody
       Attorney General
HURRICANE PREPAREDNESS GUIDE
Office of the Attorney General Consumer Protection Division4LIST OF STORM NAMES FOR 2024
The World Meteorological Organization Hurricane Committee maintained the June 1 start date to the
Atlantic hurricane season. However, in several recent years, a named storm has formed prior to the
official start date. The tradition of naming tropical storms started in 1953—since then 96 names have
been retired due to their particularly destructive nature.
The 2024 list includes the following names:
• Alberto
• Beryl
• Chris
• Debby
• Ernesto
• Francine
• Gordon• Helene
• Isaac
• Joyce
• Kirk
• Leslie
• Milton
• Nadine• Oscar
• Paty
• Rafael
• Sara
• Tony
• Valerie
• William
In the event that more than twenty-one named tropical cyclones occur in the Atlantic basin in a
season, any additional storms will take names from an alternate list of names approved by the WMO
located at www.nhc.noaa.gov .
HURRICANE PREPAREDNESS GUIDE
Office of the Attorney General Consumer Protection Division5QUICK RESOURCES
Hurricane season begins June 1st. To avoid shortages or long lines, and to ensure you have the
necessary items on hand for a storm, you should acquire and maintain nonperishable disaster items
such as canned food, batteries, bottles of water, etc. prior to, or by, June 1st and maintain this stock
of disaster preparedness items through the entire Hurricane Season, which ends November 30th each
year.
Below are some resources which may help you before, during and after a natural disaster.

Please note
that some resources may only be accessible after a State of Emergency has been declared and may be
limited by impact, severity and region.
PRE-STORM PREPARATION:
• For information on preparing for a hurricane or other disaster, visit the Florida Division of
Emergency Management at FloridaDisaster.org .
• Additionally, explore the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s disaster preparedness
resources at Ready.gov .
HEALTH, FOOD, SAFETY AND SHELTER:
• In the event of a medical emergency or apparent criminal activity, call 911 .
• If you have an immediate housing need, text SHELTER  and your ZIP code to 43362  to find
a FEMA shelter in your area or visit FEMA.gov . You may also visit the Florida Division of
Emergency Management at FloridaDisaster.org/shelters/  for an index of Florida shelters by
county.
• If you have an immediate need for food, water or shelter, call the Red Cross at
1-800-RED-CROS (1-800-733-2767) .
• To see what storm-related watches, warnings or advisories are in effect for your area, visit
the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration at Alerts.Weather.gov  and scroll down
to select the state or county of your choice.
• To determine whether your county or neighborhood is under a boil water notice or for
additional information on ensuring water is drinkable, visit the Florida Department of Health
at FloridaHealth.gov/Environmental-Health/Drinking-Water/Boil-Water-Notices .
• The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services offers a toll-free, multilingual and
confidential support services hotline 24/7 through their Disaster Distress Helpline at
1-800-985-5990 .
• To find out what referral services are available in your community, call 211 .
HURRICANE PREPAREDNESS GUIDE
Office of the Attorney General Consumer Protection Division6LEGAL ASSISTANCE:
• Legal assistance is available to qualifying Floridians through a partnership between The
Florida Bar Association and the American Bar Association.

For more information, visit
Florida.FreeLegalAnswers.org .
• The Florida Justice Technology Center provides informational resources as well as a list of
organizations that offer legal help to qualifying Floridians at FloridaLawHelp.org .
• The Florida Bar’s disciplinary rules prohibit attorneys from soliciting individuals in person
or by phone offering legal services unless they have been specifically asked to do so.
Additionally, only licensed attorneys may offer legal advice or services. Ensure your attorney
is licensed and in good standing at FloridaBar.org . Report any suspected unethical or unfair
behavior as well as any unlicensed practicing of law to The Florida Bar’s Attorney Consumer
Assistance Program at 1-866-352-0707 .
• Bay Area Legal Services’ Florida Veterans Legal Helpline provides assistance to veterans on
a range of legal issues such as housing, family law, consumer and veterans benefit matters.
Contact the Helpline at 1-866-486-6161 .
FINANCIAL RELIEF:
• Those experiencing financial losses due to a hurricane may be eligible for FEMA Disaster
Assistance. To determine your eligibility or to apply for assistance, visit FEMA.gov  or call
1-800-621-3362  or 1-800-462-7585  (TTY). There is no fee to apply or to receive assistance.
• Immediate foreclosure relief may be available from the U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development to individuals located in federally designated disaster areas. For more
information visit HUD.gov  or HUD.gov/Espanol .
• In the event of a disaster, the Governor has the option to activate the Emergency Bridge
Loan Program via executive order. A bridge loan, facilitated by the Florida Department of
Economic Opportunity, is a short-term, interest-free loan offered to support businesses that
experience physical or economic damage due to a hurricane. For more information, visit
FloridaDisasterLoan.org .
• Disaster loans may be available from the U.S. Small Business Administration to qualifying
businesses to cover losses not fully paid for by insurance or other relief methods. For more
information, visit SBA.gov . There is no fee to apply for or receive assistance.
• Disaster Unemployment Assistance may be available through the Florida Department
of Economic Opportunity to qualifying Florida residents whose jobs were adversely
affected due to a hurricane.

For more information, visit FloridaJobs.org  and enter “Disaster
Unemployment Assistance” in the search box at the top of the webpage.
• The Florida Department of Children and Families may offer additional emergency services to
Floridians during times of disaster. For more information, visit MyFLFamilies.com .
• Contact your lenders, financial institutions and service providers to see what programs
they may offer. Following a hurricane or other disaster, many businesses institute programs
to ease the financial burdens on their customers during the aftermath by restructuring or
delaying payment plans, waiving late fees, forgiving overages and more. From mortgage
servicers to phone plan providers, contact the institutions you use to determine what your
options are. Prior to signing up, be sure you understand any requirements the program may
have such as additional fees, accrual of interest and doubling of your next monthly payment.
HURRICANE PREPAREDNESS GUIDE
Office of the Attorney General Consumer Protection Division7CONSUMER PROTECTION:
• The State of Florida has tough price gouging laws in place to protect residents and guests
during a declared State of Emergency. Report suspected price gouging by:
- Downloading the “No Scam”  app, available for free on Apple and Android app stores in
both English and Spanish;
- Reporting online at MyFloridaLegal.com  by clicking on the Price Gouging button and
choosing the related emergency; or
- Calling the price gouging hotline at 1-866-9-NO-SCAM (1-866-966-7226) .
• Verify any individual or business you hire to make repairs with the Department of Business
and Professional Regulation at MyFloridaLicense.com . Ensure that they are licensed for the
type of work they will be performing. Also check with their insurance provider to confirm
they are insured and their policy is current.
• Following a hurricane, the Florida Department of Financial Services Division of Consumer
Services stands ready to assist consumers with insurance-related questions and offers
additional resources.

Contact their office at 1-877-693-5236  or online at MyFloridaCFO.com .
• The Florida Office of Insurance Regulation is also available to assist consumers with
insurance issues and offer resources at FLOIR.com .
• Those who suspect disaster-related fraud, waste, abuse or mismanagement should
report it to the FEMA Disaster Fraud Hotline at 1-866-720-5721  or online at
Justice.gov/DisasterComplaintForm .
HURRICANE PREPAREDNESS GUIDE
Office of the Attorney General Consumer Protection Division8UNDERSTANDING THE STORM
WATCH VERSUS WARNING
A Hurricane Watch  means hurricane conditions (sustained winds of at least 74 mph) are possible in
the announced area within 48 hours.
A Hurricane Watch should trigger your family’s disaster plan, and proactive measures should be
initiated such as securing a boat, leaving a barrier island, etc.
A Hurricane Warning  means hurricane conditions (sustained winds of at least 74 mph) are expected
in the announced area within 36 hours.
Once a Hurricane Warning has been issued, your family should be in the process of completing
proactive actions and moving to the safest location to be during the storm.
THE SAFFIR-SIMPSON HURRICANE WIND SCALE
This scale estimates potential property damage. Hurricanes reaching Category 3 and higher are
considered major hurricanes because of their potential for significant loss of life and damage.
Category 1 and 2 storms are still dangerous, however, and also require preventative measures.
Category 1
(74-95 mph winds)Dangerous winds will produce some damage. The damage is
primarily contained to shrubbery, trees, foliage and unanchored
homes; damage to roof, shingles, vinyl siding and gutters could
result.
Category 2
(96-110 mph winds)Extremely dangerous winds will cause extensive damage.
Considerable damage to shrubbery and tree foliage; some trees
blown down. Major damage to exposed mobile homes. Some
damage to roofing materials of buildings; some window damage.
No major damage to buildings.
Category 3
(111-129 mph winds)Devastating damage will occur. Large trees blown down.
Major damage to and removal of roof; some window and door
damage. Some structural damage to small buildings.

Mobile
homes destroyed. Serious flooding at coast and many structures
near coast destroyed; larger structures near coast damaged by
battering waves and loose debris.
Category 4
(130-156 mph winds)Catastrophic damage will occur. Severe damage to roofing
materials, windows, doors and exterior walls. Complete failures
of roofs on many small residences. Complete destruction of
mobile homes. Major damage to lower floors of structures near
shore due to flooding and battering by waves and debris. Most of
the area will be uninhabitable for weeks or months.
Category 5
(157+ mph winds)Catastrophic damage will occur. A high percentage of framed
homes will be destroyed. Complete failure of roofs on many
residences and industrial buildings. Extensive shattering of glass
in windows and doors. Small buildings overturned or blown away.
Complete destruction of mobile homes. Major damage to lower
floors of all structures less than 15 feet above sea level within
500 yards of shore.
HURRICANE PREPAREDNESS GUIDE
Office of the Attorney General Consumer Protection Division9PREPARING FOR THE STORM
In anticipation of a storm, it is important to ensure that you have done everything you can to prepare
your home, property or business.
Strengthen your home.
Declutter drains and gutters. Bring in outside furniture, garden décor
and lawn ornaments. Trim trees and loose foliage prior to storm season.
Consider boarding windows with plywood or purchasing hurricane shutters.
Hurricane shutters.
Approved hurricane shutters and impact protective systems can offer
protection for your home or business. Not all hurricane shutters or
impact protective systems meet the standards set by the Florida
Building Commission or your local building authority. For the Florida
Building Commission to approve a product designed for a window, the
product must be part of the complete window system and assembly.
Window films and related products, which are typically attached only to
the frame of a window, do not protect the window against windstorms.
Ensure you are buying a quality product:
• Ask to see the product approval by the Florida Building Commission or local building
authority.

Visit FloridaBuilding.org  to verify the approval number supplied.
 Note:  Be aware that some products may have been tested by a lab that is accredited by the
Florida Building Commission or Miami Dade County, but that does not mean the product
is an approved form of storm protection. Test results for a product may refer to the lab’s
accreditation, but this is not equivalent to a product approval.
• Check with your city or county to determine whether you need a permit to install the
products on your home; in most cases, a permit will not be issued without proper
documentation of the product approval.
• Report any company that is making fraudulent claims about window film or other
unapproved products by calling the Attorney General’s hotline at 1-866-9-NO-SCAM .
• Know that your insurance provider may provide discounts for hurricane mitigation.
HURRICANE PREPAREDNESS GUIDE
Office of the Attorney General Consumer Protection Division10Protect your car.
A tropical storm or hurricane can produce devastating flooding
and wind-borne debris that can damage vehicles. In order to
protect your vehicles, consider the following tips:
• Park in a safe location. Store your car inside a garage if
possible. If a garage is unavailable, park your car close
to a building and avoid parking under power lines or
trees. Move your car to a higher elevation if you live in a
floodplain.
• Fill your car’s gas tank before the storm so if you need
to evacuate or get help after the storm, you will have
enough gas to do so.
• Remove non-essential items from your car’s exterior.
• Store important car documents safely in a plastic bag and
take photos of your car’s interior and exterior to provide
to your insurance company in the event damage occurs.
• Avoid driving in a flood. It is often difficult to tell how
deep a puddle may be; even one foot of standing water
can damage your car.
Determine what to do with pets.
Whether you decide to evacuate or stay in your home, you will
need to make plans in advance for your pets. Not all emergency
shelters accept pets, so it is important to do your research in
advance to find out where the pet-friendly shelters are located
near you.

Put together a pet disaster supply kit that includes
medications, medical records, a first aid kit, sturdy leashes and/or
carriers, food and water.
Protect your neighbors.
If you live near senior adults or those who may need additional
help, check in with your neighbors to see if they would like
assistance securing hurricane plans, gathering supplies or
preparing their homes for the hurricane season.
Don’t forget about your business.
Tropical storms and hurricanes can impact organizations. It is
important to understand the risks and potential impacts in order
to prepare accordingly. Experts estimate that 75 percent of
businesses without a continuity plan will fail within three years of
a disaster.
HURRICANE PREPAREDNESS GUIDE
Office of the Attorney General Consumer Protection Division11PREPAREDNESS CHECKLIST
Complete this checklist to ensure your home and belongings are as protected as possible before a
storm event hits.
q Close and lock your windows.
q Inspect each window and door and reseal if necessary.
q If your doors could use some additional reinforcing, purchase and install a bolt
kit from a hardware store.
q Bring all outdoor furniture, decor and children’s toys inside.
q In advance of hurricane season, trim any tree branches that are breaking, dead
or near windows or your roof.

Once a storm is threatening your area, trimming
is discouraged as debris may not be picked up and can become projectiles
during a storm.
q Clean out your gutters.
q Store any valuables in waterproof containers.
q Turn your refrigerator and freezer to their highest settings as a precaution to
eliminate food waste due to power outage.
q Find a “safe zone” in your home.
q Move your hurricane supplies to your “safe zone.”
q Print out your insurance coverage documents and store them in a waterproof
container.
q Review your insurance coverage.
q Use surge protectors to protect your electrical appliances and property.
q Fill an extra bathtub with water if possible or fill empty gallon jugs/2-liter
bottles with water to use for showering, cleaning and rinsing.
HURRICANE PREPAREDNESS GUIDE
Office of the Attorney General Consumer Protection Division12HURRICANE SUPPL Y CHECKLIST
q Water – One gallon daily per person
for 3-7 days
q Food – Enough for 7 days
 • Non-perishable, packaged or
 canned food
 • Formula and food for infants or
 those  with dietary needs
q Non-electric can opener, paper plates,
plastic utensils
q Flashlights and extra batteries
q First aid kit, sunscreen and bug spray
q Medications * – two week minimum
supply
q Radio – Battery-powered or
hand-crank weather radio
q Special items for babies, the elderly
and those with special needs
q Toiletries
q Full tank of gas in your vehicle
q Ensure electronic devices such as cell
phones and back-up batteries are fully
charged.

Car chargers are useful to
help charge devices if you don’t have
power.q Spare propane tank or charcoal for
your grill , along with matches or
lighters
q Cash – banks and ATMs may not be
available
q Important documents in a waterproof
container **
 • Insurance cards
 • Medical records
 • Bank account and credit card
 information
 • Social Security cards
 • Birth and marriage certificates
 • Documentation of valuables
 • Important phone numbers
q Pet care items
 • Enough food, water and
 medication items to last 7 days
 • Identification and vaccination
 information
 • A carrier or cage
 • Leash and muzzle
q Portable battery bank for electronic
devices
* Florida law allows pharmacists to refill your prescribed medications early if the county
where you reside is:
• Currently under a hurricane warning issued by the National Weather Service;
• Declared by an executive order issued by the governor to be under a State of
Emergency; or
• Operating its emergency operations center and its emergency management plan.
** If you need to quickly store important documents, place them in your dishwasher and
engage the locking mechanism. Dishwashers have a water-tight seal that can help protect your
documents.
HURRICANE PREPAREDNESS GUIDE
Office of the Attorney General Consumer Protection Division13IN THE PATH OF THE STORM: HAVE A PLAN
IF YOU STAY
Consider staying in your home if you are not ordered
to evacuate, you do not live in a mobile home, you
have a disaster survival kit prepared and you have
mitigated the threat to your home by trimming trees
and safeguarding windows and doors.

IF YOU EVACUATE
Plan to evacuate if your county issues a mandatory
evacuation order, you live in a mobile home, your
home was built prior to 1973 or if your home is
vulnerable to storm surges or flooding.
List a safe, interior room with no windows where your
family will gather during a storm:
Know your child’s school or daycare disaster plan and
list important contact numbers:
Designate a meeting place should your family get
separated:
List neighbors who have an emergency generator:
List neighbors who have emergency medical training:
List neighbors who live alone or may otherwise need
assistance during an emergency situation:
If you board your pet(s) at a vet during a storm, note
the name, address and emergency number:
                                                                                               Know evacuation routes:
Designate a family member or friend in a safer area
who could house your family during an evacuation:
List emergency shelters in your area:
List a family member your family will contact in case
of separation:
Know that pets are not allowed at Red Cross shelters
and many other emergency shelters. List pet-friendly
shelters or vets in your area that offer emergency
boarding services:
HURRICANE PREPAREDNESS GUIDE
Office of the Attorney General Consumer Protection Division14PRICE GOUGING
Those affected by a natural disaster can unfortunately become victims of bad-acting businesses
and individuals out to profit from the misfortune of others. Florida has a tough price gouging law
designed to protect its residents and guests from becoming victims for a second time during or after
a disaster.
The law bans unconscionable increases in prices in the rental or sale of essential commodities such
as lumber, ice, water, generators and shelter in the area affected by the emergency once a State of
Emergency has been declared by the governor.

Under price gouging laws, it is also unlawful to raise
rental rates for hotel stays or other housing necessary for use as a direct result of an emergency.
The Florida Office of the Attorney General investigates every allegation of price gouging. The law
requires the Attorney General’s Office to compare the reported price of the essential commodity or
service during the declared State of Emergency to the average price during the 30-day period prior
to the declaration. If there is a “gross disparity” between the prior price and the current charge,
it is considered price gouging unless the seller can show that a price increase was attributable to
an increase in the costs incurred to provide the commodity or to market trends. The price gouging
statute does not apply to non-essential luxury goods like alcoholic beverages and cigarettes.
Violators of the price gouging statute are subject to civil penalties of $1,000 per violation and up to
a total of $25,000 for multiple violations committed in a single 24-hour period, in addition to other
penalties that may be imposed for violations of related laws.
AVOID BECOMING A VICTIM OF PRICE GOUGING
The best method to avoid price gouging is to plan ahead. Prepare for a
disaster before it happens, so you have the supplies you need on hand.
By creating a disaster preparedness kit that contains non-perishable
supplies such as batteries, generators, canned goods, bottled water
etc. needed for the storm season prior to June 1st , not only will you
diminish the opportunity to be price gouged on an item, but you
may also avoid long lines or shortages that may leave you without a
necessary item as a named storm approaches.
If you suspect price gouging, obtain as much information as possible
in the form of estimates, invoices, receipts, pictures or bills. When
comparing products, note as much detailed information as possible,
including the product name, size or quantity, manufacturer or brand,
item number and price. For lumber, note the grade, thickness, quantity
and quality.

If you have purchased similar items at the same business
prior to the storm, providing information about the prior purchase,
including the date of the prior purchase and the price paid, may be very
useful.
Report this information to the Attorney General’s Office by downloading
the free smartphone application, “No Scam”, to submit a complaint. The
app is available in both Apple and Android stores in English and Spanish.
You may also report violations to the Attorney General’s Price Gouging
Hotline at 1-866-9-NO-SCAM  or online at MyFloridaLegal.com .
HURRICANE PREPAREDNESS GUIDE
Office of the Attorney General Consumer Protection Division16SCAMS AT A GLANCE: AFTER THE STORM
Every emergency or natural disaster brings out unscrupulous individuals who seek to take advantage
of the crisis and prey on those in distress. The following scams are among the most prevalent during
these times:
BUILDING REPAIR AND CONTRACTING SCAMS
Qualified contractors are in high demand following a disaster, making conditions ideal for scam
artists. If your home is in need of repair, be sure to follow these tips when hiring a contractor:
• Be wary of anyone who approaches you unsolicited or says they can perform your repairs at
a discount with leftover supplies from another job.
• Have your insurance company evaluate the damage before arranging repairs to ensure that
the work will be covered under your policy.
• Get at least three written, itemized estimates or bids on repairs.
• Verify that the contractor has a license from the Department of Business & Professional
Regulation or your county construction licensing board. A licensed contractor can be looked
up and verified at MyFloridaLicense.com .
• Beware of companies/individuals who only produce an occupational license or a corporate
filing when you request information regarding the business. These documents only prove
that certain funds were paid to the government.
• Research the company and its reputation – ask for references.

In addition to DBPR, you may
also contact the Attorney General’s hotline by calling 1-866-9-NO-SCAM  and the Better
Business Bureau at bbb.org  to see if there are complaints against the company.
• Check for proof of insurance, preferably general liability and worker’s compensation
insurance, and verify with the insurer that their policies are current.
• Ensure the contractor is bonded and verify with the bonding agency. While not required,
bonding adds another layer of protection for consumers.
• Be wary of anyone offering to reduce or rebate your homeowner’s insurance policy
deductible in exchange for using their services. Florida law prohibits contractors from
paying, waiving or rebating any part of a deductible on repairs made to property covered by
an insurance policy.
• Never pay the full amount of a repair up front and hesitate before providing any large
deposits. Florida law requires a contractor to apply for a permit within 30 days and start
work within 90 days if he collects more than 10 percent of the contract up front.
• Read the entire contract, including the fine print before signing and ensure that the contract
includes the required “buyer’s right to cancel” (within 3 days) language.
• Do not sign any document through an electronic device unless you have time to review the
entire document first. You may wish to request a hard copy of the document to allow time
for a complete review of the terms.
• Homeowners may unknowingly have liens placed against their properties by suppliers or
subcontractors who have not been paid by the contractor. If the contractor fails to pay them,
the liens will remain on the title. Insist on releases of any liens that could be placed on the
property from all subcontractors prior to making final payments.
• Do not sign a certificate of completion or make final payment until you are satisfied with the
work performed.
HURRICANE PREPAREDNESS GUIDE
Office of the Attorney General Consumer Protection Division17ASSIGNMENT OF BENEFITS ISSUES
An Assignment of Benefits (AOB) is a document that allows insurance policyholders to sign over
their insurance rights or benefits to a third party after the policyholder suffers a loss. This allows
the third party to file an insurance claim, make repair decisions and collect on benefits without
the policyholder’s involvement.

While AOBs can offer convenience to policyholders attempting to
navigate the insurance claims process, unscrupulous individuals and companies may seek to take
advantage of the power an AOB provides them. If your home is damaged, keep the following in mind
as you seek to make repairs:
• Be aware that Florida law recently changed and now prohibits the assignment of post-
insurance benefits for any policy written after January 1, 2023.
• Contact your insurance company prior to signing the AOB. You may find a list of contact
numbers for insurance companies at https://floir.com/consumers/assignment-of-benefits-
resources .
• Know that you are not required to sign an AOB in order to have repairs made or to process an
insurance claim.
• Know that the AOB agreement must contain a written, itemized, per-unit cost estimate of the
services to be performed under the agreement.
• Be wary of any company that pressures you to sign or insists upon the use of an AOB in order
to do repairs.
• Read the entire contract carefully to ensure you are not signing over your benefits without
your full knowledge and consent. Some unscrupulous contractors may attempt to hide an
AOB within a lengthy repair contract.
• Know that an AOB contains language that, once executed, would prevent you from
communicating with your insurance company about the claim.
• Do not sign an AOB if there are blank spaces in the document.
• Know that legislation that became effective July 1, 2019, allows new AOBs to be rescinded
within 14 days of execution of the AOB.
• Know that this 2019 legislation also allowed new AOBs to be rescinded at least 30 days after
the scheduled work start date if the assignee has not begun substantial work. Or if no start
date is listed, a new AOB can be rescinded at least 30 days following the execution date if
the assignee has not begun substantial work.
TREE SERVICE SCAMS
Heavy winds from a hurricane or tropical storm can litter roads and yards with uprooted trees.

If you
plan to have nearby trees removed to protect your home from danger or have fallen trees needing to
be removed after a storm, follow these tips to avoid problems when hiring a tree removal service:
• Be wary of anyone who approaches you unsolicited about tree removal.
• Get multiple written estimates and ask whether debris removal is included in the estimate.
• Research the company and its reputation – ask for references, contact the Attorney General’s
hotline at 1-866-9-NO-SCAM  and the Better Business Bureau online at bbb.org  to see if
there are complaints against the company. Contact the state Department of Business &
Professional Regulation’s website at MyFloridaLicense.com  to see if the company is licensed.
• Check for proof of insurance and verify with the insurer that their policy is current.
• Never pay the full amount up front and do not make a final payment until you are completely
satisfied with the work done.
HURRICANE PREPAREDNESS GUIDE
Office of the Attorney General Consumer Protection Division18CHARITY SCAMS
Charity scams are particularly effective after a disaster, during which numerous disaster-specific
charities crop up. If you would like to donate to help with disaster relief, consider these tips:
• Avoid solicitors that use high-pressure tactics or are hesitant to provide additional
information on the charitable organization.
• Be wary of any unsolicited calls, texts, emails or social media messages soliciting donations.
• Consider donating to an established disaster-relief charity.
• Obtain a copy of the charity’s registration documents from the Florida Department
of Agriculture and Consumer Services at 1-800-HELP-FLA (1-800-435-7352)  or
FDACS.gov/ConsumerServices .
• Contact the Attorney General’s hotline by calling 1-866-9-NO-SCAM  or call the Better
Business Bureau’s Wise Giving Alliance at 703-276-0100  to determine if the charity you are
donating to has any complaints against them.
DISASTER RELIEF SCAMS
FEMA offers disaster relief to eligible victims through various programs.

When seeking aid, consider
the following:
• No state or federal disaster relief agency will call you for your financial information.
• State and federal workers carry identification and will not ask for or accept cash or gift cards.
• Know that applications for federal FEMA relief programs are free and can be accessed at
DisasterAssistance.gov  or by calling 1-800-621-FEMA (1-800-621-3362) .
• Be wary of anyone who offers to fill out, assist with or expedite your application as they may
be seeking access to your personal information.
WATER TESTING AND TREATMENT SCAMS
Water mains and personal wells can be affected during hurricanes, and dishonest companies and
individuals may offer pricey tests and devices to make water safe. Avoid falling victim by following
these tips:
• If someone claims to be a representative of your city, county or utility provider needing to
inspect your water line or well, ask for proof of identification. Consider calling the agency
directly to confirm if the representative is legitimate.
• Avoid “free” water tests as the tester is likely only interested in selling their water treatment
device. If you are in need of a water quality test, seek information on qualified testing
laboratories from the Florida Department of Health at 850-245-4444 .
• Watch your local media for any water safety alerts. If you doubt the safety of your water,
contact your local health department or utility. Local water utilities are required to test
water quality on a regular basis.
• If in doubt, boil water vigorously for one to three minutes or drink bottled water.
Anyone who encounters a scam before or after a hurricane or other natural disaster should
contact the Florida Attorney General’s Office at MyFloridaLegal.com  or at 1-866-9-NO-SCAM
(1-866-966-7226) . To report suspected price gouging, download the “No Scam” app from the Apple
and Android stores for free—available in English and Spanish.

