Why talk about a Disaster Supplies Kit?
After a disaste r, local officials and relief workers will be on the scen e, but
they cannot reach everyone immediatel y. You could get help in hours, or it
may take days. Basic services, such as electricit y, gas, wate r, and tele-
phones, may be cut off, or you may have to evacuate at a moment ’s notice.
You probably won ’t have time to shop or search for the supplies you’ll
need. Your family will cope best by
preparing for disaster before it strikes.
What is a Disaster Supplies Kit?
Assembling the supplies you mightneed following a disaster is an impor-tant part of your Family Disaster Plan.Following a disaste r, having extra sup-
plies at home or supplies to take with
you in the event of an evacuation can help your family endure evacuationor home confinement. Learn more about Disaster Supplies Kits by contact-ing your local emergency management agency or American Red Cross
chapte r.
Awareness Information
Involve children in disaster p reparedness.
Ask children to help you remember to keep your kits in working order bychanging the food and water every six months and replacing batteries asnecessar y. Children might make calendars or posters with the appropriate
dates marked on them. Ask children to think of items that they would liketo include in their own Disaster Supplies Kit, such as books or games orappropriate nonperishable food items.
Disaster Supplies Kit
Disaste rSupplie sKit
Talking About Disaster: Guide for Standard Message s19Local officials and relief workers will be
on the scene, but they cannot reach
everyone immediatel y.

You could get
help in hours, or it may ta ke days… you
probably won’t have time to shop or
search for the supplies you’ll need.Produced by theNational DisasterEducation Coalition:American Red Cross,FEMA, IAEM, IBHS,NFPA, NWS, USDA/CSREES, and USGS
Disaster Supplies Ki t 20Prepare Your Kit
Tips for Your Disaster Supplies Kit
• Keep a smaller Disaster Supplies Kit in the trunk of ea ch car.
If you become stranded or are not able to return hom e, having some
items will help you to be more comfortable until help arrives.
• Keep items in airtight plastic bags .This will help protect them from
damage or spoiling.
• Replace sto red food and water every six months .Replacing your
food and water supplies will help ensure their freshness.
• Rethink your kit and family needs at least once a year.Replace
batteries, update clothes, etc.
• Ask your p hysician or pharmacist about storing p rescription
medications .It may be difficult to obtain prescription medications dur-
ing a disaster because stores may be closed or supplies may be limited.
• Use an easy-to-carry container for the supplies you would
most li kely need for an evacuation .Label it clearl y. Possible
containers include:
n A larg e, covered trash containe r.
n A camping backpack.
n A duffel bag.
n A cargo container that will fit on the roof of your vehicle.
Disaster Supplies Kit Basics
The following items might be needed at home or for an evacuation.Keeping them in an easy-to-carry backpack or duffel bag near your door
would be best in case you need to evacuate quickl y, such as in a tsunami,
flash flood, or major chemical emergenc y. Store your kit in a co nvenient
place known to all family members.

Kit basics are:• A portabl e, battery-powered radio or television and extra batteries.
• Flashlight and extra batteries.
• First aid kit and first aid manual.
• Supply of prescription medications.
• Credit card and cash.
• Personal identification.
• An extra set of car keys.
• Matches in a waterproof containe r.
• Signal flare.
• Map of the area and phone numbers of places you could go.
• Special needs, for exampl e, diapers or formula, prescription medicines
and copies of prescriptions, hearing aid batteries, spare wheelchair batter y, spare eyeglasses, or other physical needs.
If you have additional spac e, consider adding some of the items from
your Evacuation Supplies Kit.
Evacuation Supplies Kit
Place in an easy-to-carry container the supplies you would most likely needif you were to be away from home for several days. Label the container
clearl y.

Remember to include:
• Disaster Supplies Kit basics (listed ab ove).
• Three gallons of water per person.
• Three-day supply of nonperishable food.
• Kitchen accessories: manual can opener; mess kits or paper cups,plates, and plastic/disposable utensils; utility knife; a can of cookingfuel if food must be cooked; household liquid bleach to treat drinkingwater; suga r, salt, pepper; aluminum foil; plastic resealable bags.
• One complete change of clothing and footwear for each family membe r,
sturdy shoes or workboots, raingea r, hat and gl oves, thermal under-
wear, sunglasses.
• Blankets or sleeping bag for each family membe r.
• Tools and other accessories: pape r, pencil; needles and thread; pliers,
shut-off wrench, sh ovels, and other useful tools; tape; medicine dropper;
whistle; plastic sheeting; small caniste r, A-B-C-type fire extinguisher;
emergency preparedness manual; tube tent; compass.
•Sanitation and hygiene items: toilet pape r, tow-
elettes; soap, hand sanitize r, liquid detergent; femi-
nine supplies; personal items such as shampoo,deodorant, toothpast e, toothbrushes, comb and
brush, lip balm; plastic garbage bags (heavy-duty)and ties (for personal sanitation uses); medium-sized plastic bucket with tight lid; disinfectant;household chlorine bleach; small sh ovel for digging
an expedient latrine.
•Entertainment, such as games and books.
•Remember to consider the needs of very
young and older family members, su ch as
Talking About Disaster: Guide for Standard Message s21To Build a Makeshift Toilet
Line a bucket with a garbage bag andmake a toilet seat out of two boardsplaced parallel to each other across thebucket. After each use, pour a disinfec-tant such as bleach (1 part liquid chlorinebleach to 10 parts water) into the garbagebag. This will help avoid infection andstop the spread of disease. Cover thebucket tightly when it is not in use.
Bury garbage and human waste to
avoid the spread of disease by rats andinsects.

Dig a pit two to three feet deepand at least 50 feet downhill or away fromany well, spring, or water supply.
Disaster Supplies Ki t 22infants and elderly or disabled persons.
n For baby: formula, diapers, bottles, powdered milk, medications.
n For adults: heart and high blood pressure medication, insulin, pre-scription drugs, denture needs, contact lenses and supplies, extraeyeglasses, and hearing aid batteries.
Home Disaster Supplies Kit
In addition to your Disaster Supplies Kit basics and Evacuation Supplies Kit,gathering the following items will help your family endure home confine-ment, which often happens following disasters and may include the loss of utilities.• Wrench to turn off household gas and wate r. Keep it near the shut-off
valves.
• A week ’s supply of food and wate r.
• Additional blankets and sleeping bags.Also, consider using a N OAA Weather Radio with the tone-alert feature
in your home. N OAA Weather Radio is the best means for receiving warn-
ings from the National Weather Service. The National Weather Service con-
tinuously broadcasts updated weather warnings and forecasts that can bereceived by N OAA Weather Radios sold in many stores. N OAA Weather
Radio now broadcasts warning and postevent information for all types ofhazards — both natural (such as earthquakes and volcanic activity) andtechnological (such as chemical releases or oil spills). Working with other
federal agencies and the Federal Communications Commission ’s new
Emergency Alert System, N OAA Weather Radio is an “all hazards” radio
network, making it the single source for the most comprehensive weatherand emergency information available to the public. Your National Weather
Service recommends purchasing a radio that has both a battery backup and a Specific Area Message Encoder (SAME) featur e, which automatically
alerts you when a watch or warning is issued for your count y, giving you
immediate information about a life-threatening situation.

The averagerange is 40 miles, depending on topography; the National Weather Radio
signal is a line-of-sight signal, which does not bore through hills or mountains.
Water
Having an ample supply of clean water is a top priority in an emergenc y.
• Store water in plastic containers, su ch as soft drink plastic bo t-
tles.Seal containers tightl y, label them and store in a cool, dark place.
Replace water every six months. Avoid using containers that will
decompose or break, such as milk cartons or glass bottles.
• Keep at least a th ree-day supply of water, or a minimum of
three gallons per person .It is strongly recommended to have more
if possible. Use one-half gallon per day for drinking, and one-half gallonfor cooking and sanitation. A normally active person needs to drink atleast two quarts of water each da y. Hot e nvironments and intense phys-
ical activity can double that amount. Children, nursing mothers, and illpeople will need more. Store your three-day supply in a handy place.You need to have water packed and ready in case there is no time to
fill water bottles when disaster strikes.
• Water needs to be t reated only if it is of questionable purit y.
n Boiling is the safest method of treating wate r. Strain water through a
clean cloth to rem ove bulk impurities. Bring water to a rolling boil
for about one full minut e, keeping in mind that some water will
evaporate. Let the water cool before drinking. Boiled water will tastebetter if you put oxygen back into it by pouring the water back andforth between two clean containers. This will also impr ove the taste
of stored wate r.
n You can use household liquid bleach to kill microorganisms. Use
only regular household liquid bleach that contains 5.25 percent sodi-um hypochlorite. Do not use scented bleaches, color-safe bleaches,or bleaches with added cleaners. Add 16 drops of bleach per gallonof wate r, stir, and let stand for 30 minutes. If the water does not
have a slight bleach odo r, repeat the dosage and let stand another
15 minutes. If it still does not smell of chlorin e, discard it and find
another source of wate r.

Other chemicals, such as iodine or water
treatment products sold in camping or surplus stores that do notcontain 5.25 percent hypochlorite as the only active ingredient, arenot recommended and should not be used.
n Distillation i nvolves boiling water and then collecting the vapor that
condenses back to wate r. The condensed vapor will not include salt
or other solid impurities. To distill, fill a pot halfway with wate r. Tie a
cup to the handle on the pot ’s lid so that the cup will hang rightside
up when the lid is upside down (make sure the cup is not touchingthe water) and boil the water for 20 minutes. The water that dripsfrom the lid into the cup is distilled.
• Melt ice cubes or use water f rom undamaged hot water tanks,
toilet tanks (not the b owl), and water pipes if you need addition-
al water.
• If you need to find water outside of your home, you can use
rainwater; st reams, ri vers, and  other m oving bodies of water;
ponds and la kes; and natu ral springs. If you question its purity,
Talking About Disaster: Guide for Standard Message s23
Disaster Supplies Ki t 24be su re to t reat the water first .Avoid water with floating material,
an odo r, or a dark colo r. Use saltwater only if you distill it first. Do NOT
drink flood wate r.
Food
Even though it is unlikely that an emergency would cut off your food supply for two weeks, you should consider preparing a supply that will lastthat long. The easiest way to develop a two-week stockpile is to increasethe amount of basic foods you normally keep on your shelves. If your watersupply is limited, try to avoid foods that are high in fat and protein, anddon’t stock salty foods, since they will make you thirst y. Familiar foods can
lift morale and give a feeling of security in time of stress. Also, cannedfoods won ’t require cooking, wate r, or special preparation. Take into
account your family ’s unique needs and tastes.

Try to include foods that
they will enjoy and that are also high in calories, protein, carbohydrates,vitamins, and minerals.• Pack at least a th ree-day supply of nonperishable food and
water, and sto re it in a han dy place. You need to have these items
packed and ready in case there is no time to gather food from thekitchen when disaster strikes.
• Select foods that require no refrige ration, p reparation, or
cooking, and little or no water. Foods that a re compact and
lightweight a re easy to sto re and carr y.
• If you must heat food, pa ck a can of cooking fuel.
• Try to eat salt-f ree crackers, whole g rain ce reals, and canned
food with high liquid content .Recommended foods include:
n Ready-to-eat canned meats, fruits, and vegetables.
n Canned juic e, milk, and soup (if powdered, store extra water).
n High-energy foods, such as  peanut butte r, jelly, crackers, granola
bars, and trail mix.
n Comfort foods, such as hard cand y, sweetened cereals, candy bars,
and cookies.
n Instant coffe e, tea bags.
n Foods for infants, elderly persons, or persons on special diets, if necessar y.
Also consider:
n Compressed food bars. They store well, are lightweight, taste good,and are nutritious.
n Trail mix. Available prepackaged, or assemble your own.
n Dried foods. They can be nutritious and satisfying, but contain a lotof salt, which promotes thirst.
n Freeze-dried foods. They are tasty and lightweight, but will needwater for reconstitution.
n Instant meals. Cups of noodles or cups of soup are a good addition,although they need water for reconstitution.
n Snack-sized canned goods. Good because they generally have pull-top lids or twist-open keys.
n Prepackaged beverages. Those in foil packets and foil-lined boxesare suitable because they are tightly sealed and will keep for a long time.
Food options to avoid:
n Commercially dehydrated foods. They can require a great deal of water for reconstitution and extra effort in preparation.
n Bottled foods.

They are generally too heavy and bulk y, and break
easily.
n Meal-sized canned foods. They are usually bulky and heav y.
n Whole grains, beans, pasta. Preparation could be complicated underthe circumstances of a disaste r.
• If your electricity goes off:
n First, use perishable food and foods f rom the refrige rator.
n Then, use the foods f rom the f reezer.To minimize the number
of times you open the freezer doo r, post a list of freezer contents on
it.

In a well-filled, well-insulated freeze r, foods will usually still have
ice crystals in their centers (meaning foods are safe to eat) for atleast three days.
n Finall y, begin to use nonperishable foods and staples.
• Remember to sto re nonperishable foods for your pets.
First Aid Kit
Assemble a first aid kit for your Disaster Supplies Kit and
one for ea ch car.
• The basics for your first aid kit include:
n First aid manual.
n Sterile adhesive bandages in assorted sizes.
n Assorted sizes of safety pins.
n Cleansing agent/soap.
Talking About Disaster: Guide for Standard Message s25
Disaster Supplies Ki t 26n Latex gl oves (2 pairs).
n Sunscreen.
n 2-inch sterile gauze pads (4–6).
n 4-inch sterile gauze pads (4–6).
n Triangular bandages (3).
n Nonprescription drugs.
n 2-inch sterile roller bandages (3 rolls).
n 3-inch sterile roller bandages (3 rolls).
n Scissors.
n Tweezers.
n Needle.
n Moistened towelettes.
n Antiseptic.
n Thermomete r.
n Tongue depressor blades (2).
n Tube of petroleum jelly or other lubricant.
• Have the following nonp rescription drugs in your Disaster
Supplies Kit:
n Aspirin or nonaspirin pain relieve r.
n Antidiarrhea medication.
n Antacid (for stomach upset).
n Syrup of ipecac (use to induce vomiting if advised by the poison control center).
n Laxative.
n Activated charcoal (use if advised by the poison control center).
n Vitamins.
• Add a ny necessary p rescription and nonp rescription drugs.
• Add special needs for infants, elderly persons, or a nyone with
serious alle rgies.
Important Documents
• Keep the following original documents in a sa fe deposit box
if possible, and copies in a waterp roof, fi re-resistant portable
container:
n Will, insurance policies, contracts, deeds, stocks and bonds.
n Passports, social security cards,

immunization records.
n Bank account numbers.
n Credit card account numbers and companies.
n Inventory of valuable household goods, important telephone
numbers.
n Family records (birth, marriag e, death certifica tes).
Talking About Disaster: Guide for Standard Message s27,

