Emergency
Preparedness
Guidelines
for Levees
A Guide for Owners and Operators
January 2018
Emergency Preparedness Guidelines for Levees
   i
 Preface
Responsibility for flood risk management in the United States is shared between Federal, State,
and local government agencies ; private -sector stakeholders ; and the general public . Federal
agencies such as the U .S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) and the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) have programs to assist states and communities in reducing flood
damages and promoting sound flood risk management. The authority to deter mine how land is
used in floodplains and to enforce flood -wise requirements is entirely the responsibility of State
and local governments . As emergency preparedness constitutes an important element of a
comprehensive flood risk management framework, public  and private l evee owners  and
operators should consider undertaking emergency plan ning efforts in order to properly respond
to potential flood events , and other natural or manmade incidents that could result in human
casualties, property destruction, and economic losses .
This document , which  was prepared under the auspices of the Levee  Sub-Sector Coordinating
Council and Levee Sub -Sector Government Coordinating Council , aims to assist public and
private stakehol ders that have responsibilities as owners or operators in managing levees,
floodwalls, pumping stations , and any other components of flood risk management systems. The
intent of this document is to provide guidance in  preparing for , and responding to , potential
natural and manmade incidents  at levees .
This document includes basic recommendations regarding how to plan and prepare for high
water  events  and identifies some practical steps that could be considered before, during, and after
such events . The document also provide s some basic guidance on how to develop an emergency
preparedness plan and introduces basic security concepts . Some sections are loosely adopted
from the National Incident Management System  (NIMS)  that was re-issued by FEMA  in 20 17,
and is based on the Incident Command System  (ICS) . This document also utilizes material from
the Dam s Sector Crisis Management Handbook.
Public and private stakeholders with responsibilities as owners or operators in managing levees
are encouraged to review and apply this guidance to their facility, as appropriate .

Stakeholders
are also urged to actively coordinate emergency plans with the appropriate State  or local
emergency management organization s in order to follow the corresponding emergency planning
requirements.
For additional information, please contact the Dams Sector -Specific Agency at
dams@hq.dhs.gov .
Emergency Preparedness Guidelines for Levees
   ii
This page intentionally left blank
Emergency Preparedness Guidelines for Levees
   iii
 Table of Contents
I. Emergency Preparedness  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................... 1
II. Developing an Emergency Preparedness Plan  ................................ ................................ .......................... 3
III. Security Awareness  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 7
IV. Developing a Security Plan  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................... 9
V. Importance of Evacuation Plans  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............. 11
VI. Importance of Training and Exercises  ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 13
VII. Importance of Community Outreach  ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 17
VIII. Managing Incidents: Structure and Responsibilities  ................................ ................................ ........... 19
Appendix A: Flood -Fighting Equipment  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 23
Appendix B: Flood -Fighting Response Activities  ................................ ................................ ......................... 27
Emergency Preparedness Guidelines for Levees
   iv
This page intentionally left blank
Emergency Preparedness Guidelines for Levees
   1
 I. Emergency Preparedness
Many of the Nation’s levees are designed and built to help control or contain the flow of water
and reduce flood risk in communities. Throughout the United States , levees have prevented
flooding on countless occasions. However, there are risks  associated with levees . Even highly
engineered structures can experience extraordinary conditions and possibly  fail. I t is important
that levee owners and operators, community officials, and people who live in leveed areas are
prepared for the possibility  of levee failure or other emergency. Levees that fail often do so
catastrophically.
The U.S. Department of Homeland Security  (DHS)  considers  levees to be part of the Nation’s
critical infrastructure and collaborates with corresponding public and private partners to identify
levees that pr esent the greatest risk to the N ation .

DHS also coordinate s corresponding protective
programs that utilize an all -hazards approach  to risks  (considering manmade and natural
incidents ). This collaborati on highlights the importance of protecting  and ensuring the safety of
the Nation’s levees with contribution from all levels of government and the private sector. As
demonstrated during Hurricane Katrina  in 2005 , however,  breaching of levees and subsequent
flooding is still a possibility regardless of elaborate protection and safety programs . It is,
therefore,  incumbent upon all levee owners  and operators to maintain an effective emergency
preparedness plan.
Preparedness actions are aimed at planning, org anizing, training, equipping, exercising,
evaluating, and implementing corrective actions to ensure effective coordination during incident
response. Preparedness activities may include development of emergency plans, communication
strategies , exercises , and training emergency response teams ; as well as management and
stockpile of disaster supplies and equipment. Emergency preparedness plans are intended to
provide a clear  and effective structure with which  to manage an emergency. For levee systems,
emerge ncy preparedness plan s focus on actions that may be considered during a flooding event.
While flooding caused by a levee breach is the most common emergency facing a levee, the plan
should also consider other  potential emergency situations.
Large levee systems with multiple pump ing stations  and drains require more detailed plans than
smaller systems. As a minimum,  however,  levee owners and operators should maintain at least
an organizational chart or roster  with lists or maps of important project feature s. If possible ,
emergency planning efforts should also address issues related to delegation of authority and
responsibility , with periodic updates to account for change s in personnel.
Emergency preparedness efforts may also consider short -term situation s that might arise during
the life of the project. For example, if a culvert that runs through a levee is being replaced, a plan
may be needed in case there is a flood during the construction period, during which time levee
integrity is lacking.
Emergency planning may cover other key aspects such as potential assembly or staging areas for
flood ing events,  location of earth borrow sites, and procedures for maintaining records of
Emergency Preparedness Guidelines for Levees
   2
 equipment, manpower, and supplies.

Understanding no plan can guarantee that a levee system
will not fail under all circumstances, levee owners  and operators  are encouraged to work with
local public safety officials to assist them in developing effective evacuation plans.
Figure 1  - Sacramento River at Miller Park, Sacramento, California
(Source: U.S. Army Corps of Engineers  Digital Visual Library , 2010 )
Emergency Preparedness Guidelines for Levees
   3
 II. Developing an Emergency Preparedness Plan
An emergency preparedness plan, also referred to as an emergency action plan , should address  a
variety of issues including evacuation activities , communication  protocols  with local emergency
operations centers and the general public, individual roles and responsibilities during an
emergency, and supplies and materials that may be needed. The plan will vary depending on how
a community is organized , but should  establish priorities for responding to an emergency such
as:
 Protection of life and property ;
 Communication of hazardous conditions to public agencies and the  public ; and
 Restoration of normal operations .
The plan should identify the local emergency management agency  that will respond to and
manage an emergency , as well as describe how emergency conditions are identified and
reported. It should clearly identify who has the  authority to activate the emergency preparedness
plan and provide a broad description of the conditions that will require activation of the  plan,
such as adverse weather projections, increased water flows, potential or actual levee breaches ,
etc. These criteria should be very general , as the decision to activate an emergency preparedness
plan ultimately resides with the informed judgment of senior management .
One critical element of the emergency preparedness plan is the identification of an  emergency
operations center where key personnel can coordinate the response. This can be as basic as a
command vehicle or a conference room. The location selected should contain  sufficient
resources to manage an emergency (e.g., backup power, communications tools , inundation maps,
engineering records, lists of vendors, and emergency inventory resources ).

While not always
practical, the identification of an alternate emergency operations center is also recommended in
the event that  the primary location is unavailable.
The plan should also address steps to be taken prior to an emergency, such as establishing close
working relationships with State and local emergency management and public safety agencies.
While government agencies a re responsible for declaring the need to evacuate a given area, levee
owners  and operators are encouraged to establish communication with residents and businesses
whose properties could  potential ly be impacted by a levee breach.
Plan Development
A person with a sufficient level of authority should be assigned to develop and maintain the
emergency preparedness plan based on guidance from senior management. The plan should be
created by levee personnel  with assistance and input from local emergency responders and other
community members who maintain responsibilities during an emergency situation. Development
of emergency plans should be actively coordinate d with the appropriate State  or local emergency
management organization s that can also advise of  any State  or local emergency planning
requirements.
Emergency Preparedness Guidelines for Levees
   4
 In developing an emergency  preparedness plan, personnel should engage all critical aspects of
the organization, including operations and maintenance, engineering, and key support operations
such as purchasing, facilities, and information technology. Levee personnel responsible for
managing external relations may also play an important role in the development of an emergency
preparedness plan . Once the plan has been complete d, it should be reviewed periodically,
annually at a minimum  and approved  by senior management. The plan should also be exercised
with all st akeholders on a scheduled basis.
Plan Management
An emergency preparedness  plan should be reviewed periodically , after events triggering its
activation , or after unusual or unanticipated  incident s.
Periodic plan updates should include verification that  sources of emergency equipment, contact
names , and telephone numbers are current . The resource and personnel information should be
located in a separate document for security and privacy purposes. A review of evacuation routes
and emergency shelter locati ons should be established to determine if they fulfill the evacuation
and sheltering needs of the community. If changes are made, they should be cleared for
dissemination and provided to the general public.
After an actual even t or exercise, levee person nel should closely examine actions taken to
determine whether they were effective and efficient.

Given that floods may occur decades apart,
it is important that information be recorded for use in future planning efforts. Debriefing
sessions, with all parti cipants represented, provide valuable feedback on lessons learned.
Information obtained during the se sessions may include actions that worked well, areas for
improvement, and recommendations to resolve any outstanding issues  or concerns.
Organizational Chart/ Roster
One key component is the development of an emergency notification organizational chart
(“flowchart ”) to establish who will be notified by whom and in what priority. The flowchart
should  include names and essential contact information (e.g.,  home, office, mobile , and pager
numbers) , and should also include essential public agencies that need to be notified. The
flowchart should be kept internal and the document should be appropriately marked  (e.g., For
Internal  Use Only , For Official Use Only , or any other relevant designation) .
It is strongly recommended that levee owner s and operator s compile a directory including
telephone numbers for the  area’s  emergency operation s center, local contractors, flood fight
supply and equipment vendors, Red Cross, Salvation Army, hospitals, railroad  and highway
departments, and police and fire departments. In many communities, the corresponding
emergency services organizations may be able to provide this information  in support of
emergency preparedness planni ng efforts .
Emergency Preparedness Guidelines for Levees
   5
 Important Project Features
As a basic planning  recommendation , levee owner s and operator s should  develop and maintain
either a list or annotated map that describes each project feature and areas of concern during a
flood event. The list should clearly note:
 Low areas ;
 Areas subject to boils ;
 Areas of known seepage ;
 Areas of recent rodent activity ;
 Alternate access points to the levee (should the primary  access point become impassible) ;
 Locations of drains that should be checked for closure ; and
 Available sources and locations of sandbags, pumps , and other supplies .
Along with this information, levee owners and operators  should develop and maintain a detailed
table of project features  that may need to be closed, such as  floodgates , flap gates , etc.

This table
should denote  the river level or other indicator s that would signal at what point  each feature
should  be closed. Moreover,  the highway or railroad departments need to be contacted prior to
closing roads or railroad tracks running through levees and floodwalls.
Annual Inspections
Levee owners  and operators  should consider a pre -flood  season inspection program for flood
control projects. When conducting  pre-flood  season inspections, levee personnel  should
document the condition of the project in an annual inspection report and also in the emergency
preparedness plan. Appropriate items to document in this report include:
 Name/location of the levee ;
 Date of inspection ;
 Name of inspector ;
 Project features that were inspected ;
 Overall condition of project features ;
 Maintenance that has been completed ;
 Maintenance that is currently being performed ;
 Maintenance items that need to be accomplished in the future ;
 Photographs showing flood damages, deficiencies, and overall
project condition ; and
 Maintenance costs incurred for the flood control project that year .
Emergency Preparedness Guidelines for Levees
   6
Figure 2  - Levee inspection by boat  (Source: U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
Digital Visual Library , 2010)
Emergency Preparedness Guidelines for Levees
   7
 III. Security Awareness
In addition to natural hazards, criminal or terrorist acts may also pose a potential threat to levees.
Historically, terrorist groups have conducted surveillance of potential infrastructure targets.
These efforts can be conducted over many months or even years. Additional surveillance may be
conducted immediately  prior to the attack to assess any security e nhancements that have been
implemented and to adjust the attack plan if necessary. Although there is no  credible information
indicating that terrorists have identified levees as potential targets, levee owners  and operators
should be aware of the possibili ty of a terrorist attack targeting levees and other flood risk
reduction structures. Moreover, security protocols should be captured in a comprehensive
preparedness program.
Awareness and continuous vigilance are vital to enhancing the security of levees  and supporting
facilities.

As such, suspicious activities should be immediately reported to the corresponding
local law enforcement, Federal Bureau of Investigation  (FBI) , or State and local Fusion Centers.
Levee personnel should be alert to the following  signs of possible surveillance attempts,
particularly during periods of potential flooding or heightened national threat advisories:
 Presence of strangers or unknown vehicles in areas near or adjacent to the levee,
particularly if observed over the cours e of multiple days.
 Individuals in accessible areas open to the public who do not fit the normal profile or
behavior of walkers, joggers, boaters, or cyclists.
 Persons using cameras, video devices, or optical equipment to photograph or diagram
levee struct ures or their support systems such as pumps, gates, electrical components, or
communications facilities.
 Aircraft or U nmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS)  flyover in restricted airspace; boat
encroachment into restricted areas, or unusual recovering or tossing of items.
 Unusual maintenance activities (e.g., road repairs) near the asset.
 Cuts in fencing or gates, particularly to key areas of the levee structure with no resulting
theft, vandalism, or other petty criminal activity.
 Unusual requests for information from persons approaching levee employees, friends, or
family members ; or calling, visiting, or sending e -mails with questions regarding the
operation of the levee.
 Theft of marked vehicles, work clothes, or identification cards from levee  personnel ,
contractors, or oth er authorized personnel.
 Persons attempting unauthorized access (i.e. criminal hacking) of computers, systems, or
websites looking for personal information, maps, or other targeting examples.
The above list should not be considered all -inclusive, and pers onnel should use good judgment
and experience to identify activities that are deemed to be suspicious.

Some of these activities are
difficult to pinpoint, especially in recreational areas, since many of the items used in surveillance
efforts are  also commo nly used by campers, hikers, and nature photographers.
When reporting a suspicious activity, personnel should be prepared to provide detailed
information regarding the suspicious behavior and a description of the person s, vehicles, etc.
Emergency Preparedness Guidelines for Levees
   8
 Any type of photog raphic evidence could effectively enhance the report, but care should be taken
to ensure that personnel safety is not compromised. DHS , in coordination with public and private
stakeholders, also developed a suspicious activity reporting tool available thro ugh the Homeland
Security Information Network -Critical Sectors (HSIN -CI) Dams Portal.1 This reporting tool is
intended to provide real -time awareness of potential suspicious activi ties occurring at the
Nation’s dams and levees , thus providing the opportunity to evaluate reports from a broad range
of agencies and organizations . The tool is not intended to replace other reporting mechanisms,
but rather enhance them by ensuring that levee owners  and operators have the capability to
evaluate reports fr om other stakeholders, agencies, and organizations  in an effort to improve
situational awareness . This information may also assist in determining whether operational
changes or enhanced pr otective measures are warranted.
Figure 3  - Preparing for flooding in Fargo, North Dakota
(Source: FEMA Photo Library , 2010 )
1 HSIN -CI Dams Portal is a Web -based system that provides situational awareness and facilitates information sharing and collaboration with
public and private stakeholder s, domestically and internationally. For access, contact the Dams Sector -Specific Agency within the U.S.
Department of Homeland Security at dams@hq.dhs.gov .
Emergency Preparedness Guidelines for Levees
   9
 IV. Developing a Security Plan
To ensure all personnel are aware of established security measures and protocols, including
proper procedures for reporting suspicious activities, l evee owners  and operators may choose to
develop a security plan.

The availability of a security plan can contribute greatly to the
improvement of security as it details roles and responsibilities, physical and cybersecurity
requirements, coordination with law enforcement officials, and procedures for reporting
suspicious activities.
Levee owners  and operators who desire more information about  the development of a security
plan should review the Levee Security Plan Template available through the HSIN -CI Dams
Portal. This template is intended to serve as a practical tool to assist in the development of a
security plan if it is deemed that one is necessary. Although it provides a general outline of a
basic security plan, the document is not intended to be inclusive, and some  of its elements may
not be relevant to a particular levee system. The template, which  include s sample language for
consideration, highlights the fact that a team approach is highly recommended in the
development of any security planning effort. Such a tea m could include representation of
multiple disciplines and different organizational elements, as well as the corresponding law
enforcement agencies.
The scope and content of the plan should be commensurate with the size and complexity of the
facility. The  plan should clearly outline employee responsibilities as they relate to security, and
should also address coordination mechanisms with the corresponding law enforcement
jurisdictions.
Basic elements of the security plan may include:
 Coordination with law enforcement agencies ;
 Reporting and managing security incidents ;
 Physical security ;
 Communications and cybersecurity ;
 Employee/ contractor identification ;
 Security contracting ; and
 Coordination with emergency  and o perational plans.
The plan may describe any physical security measures that are routinely in place during normal
operations , as well as the person responsible for those measures. Protective measures that may be
considered include replacing and/or upgrading lock systems, ins talling gates or barriers to
prevent vehicle entry to important facilities, and deploying security systems such as cameras,
alarms, and access control systems. In addition, the plan should address any security issues
associated with visitor access, recreat ion areas, tours , or other routine activities.

The plan should
also address the linkage between security activities and the levee’s overall emergency
preparedness plan.
Emergency Preparedness Guidelines for Levees
   10
Figure 4  - Law enforcement agencies assisting with flood response
in South Kingston,  Rhode Island  (Source: FEMA  Photo Library , 2010 )
Emergency Preparedness Guidelines for Levees
   11
 V. Importance of Evacuation Plans
During Hurricane Katrina in August 2005, the mayor of New Orleans ordered a mandatory
evacuation of the entire city. Although not all residents heeded the warning, the evacuation that
took place prevented an even worse catastrophe. This event illustrates the importance of having
an effective evacuation plan to ensure that the area is properly evacuated in anticipation of a
flooding event. This process requires collab oration among the levee owner s and operator s, local
law enforcement officials, emergency management agencies, and other appropriate entities.
Government agencies are responsible for declaring the evacuation of  a given area and will, in
many instances, al ready have evacuation  plans in place. If, however,  levee owner s and operator s
are unsure if this type of emergency planning has occurred, they are encouraged to contact the
appropriate  local emergency management agency to verify the status of existing plans . As a
general recommendation, the development of evacuation plans should be done in coordination
with the corresponding l evee owner s and operator s. This ensures  that levee monitoring protocols
and notification procedures for communicating levee statu s to emergency response personnel  are
carried out effectively during an emergency .
While not responsible for developing an evacuation plan, levee owners  and operators  are
encouraged to maintain close contact with appropriate government agencies during eme rgencies
to provide timely and accurate information on levee conditions . An effective evacuation plan
should be included in the emergency preparedness plan or at a minimum , referenced. If the
evacuation plan is a separate document, the emergency preparedness plan should inform
personnel as to its location.
 Figure 5  - Road in Red Wing, Minnesota, is closed due to flooding
(Source: FEMA  Photo Library , 2010 )
Emergency Preparedness Guidelines for Levees
   12
This page intentionally left blank
Emergency Preparedness Guidelines for Levees
   13
 VI.

Importance of Training and Exercises
Depending on the characteristics of the levee system, some personnel may need training  to
operate, maintain, and patrol  the levee  system . It is recommended that training and exercises be
periodically conducted  in order to demonstrate how to operate the closure structures, respond to
sandboils , and patrol the area during a flood. A plan developed for a flood response is not
sufficient  unless it has been  practiced and communicated to those who will execute the  plan’s
procedures . Training and exercises also inform personnel  about the time and resources necessary
to complete certain tasks. Important practical considerations and physical limitations that could
be easily overlooked in a plan are often  identified  during an exercise.
As general guidance , basic training and exercise activities could include :
 Physical operation of project features (e.g., sluice gates, pumping stations, closure
structures );
 Notification of emergency response personnel ;
 Test of communications/backup communications s ystem ;
 Mobilization of monitoring teams and monitoring project features ;
 Basic flood fight techniques ;
 Coordination and control (between volunteers, patrols, operators, nearby levee districts,
highway department, State emergency operations center, etc) ; and
 Dissemination of information to the public .
Exercises can be made  more elaborate  by includ ing other emergencies that could  take place
during a flood (e.g., car accidents or gas spills occurring when interior streets or evacuation
routes are flooded ). Representatives from the relevant government agencies or response
organizations may be able to assist  in planning more complex exercises. Levee owners  and
operators  are also encouraged to involve  the State and  local emergency operations center.
There are various types of e xercises that can be conducted to test emergency preparedness plans,
including :2
 Workshop : This is a discussion -based exercise often employed to determine objectives,
develop scenarios, and define evaluation criteria in support of additional exercise
activities. A workshop may also be used to familiarize staff with their roles and
responsibilities, develop standard operating procedures (SOPs), or generate improvement
plans.

To be effective, workshops must be highly focused on a spec ific issue, and the
desired outcome must be clearly defined.
 Tabletop Exercise : This is a discussion -based exercise that typically involves key
personnel discussing hypothetical scenarios in an informal setting. Participants are
encouraged to discuss issu es in depth and develop decisions slowly , avoiding the
spontaneous decision making  behaviors  that often  occur under actual or simulated
2 Homeland Security Exercise and Evaluation Program (HSEEP) , Volume I: HSEEP Overview and Exercise Program Management, April 2013.
Emergency Preparedness Guidelines for Levees
   14
 emergency conditions. Players apply their knowledge and skills to a list of problems
presented by the exercise facilitat or, and the proposed solutions are discussed as a group.
 Functional Exercise : This is an operations -based exercise characterized by  an actual
response to emergency conditions. This type of exercise , in which m ovement of
personnel and equipment is simulated , replicates operation al realities  through a scenario
that requi res rapid and effective response  by trained personnel in a time -constrained
environment.
 Full-Scale Exercise : This exercise includes  all the elements of a functional exercise  as
well as  actual deployment of field resources and engagement by outside parties , such as
government agencies . This is an operations -based exercise in which p ersonnel and
resources are mobilized and deployed to the scene where they conduct their activities as
if a real incident had occurred . This is the most resource intensive exercise format , and
must be carefully controlled to ensure that persons who are not part of the exercise are
informed and do not believe there is a real emergency.
Exercise activities may include participation in State and local emergency exercises where levee
personnel  can interact with multiple public safety agencies. Additional opportunities to identify
improvement actions may be found through the review of the le vee emergency preparedness plan
after an activation  triggered by a real -world incident .
Figure 6  - Government representatives, non -governmental organizations, and
private industry partners participating at an exercise in Baton Rouge, Louisiana
(Source: FEMA  Photo Library , 2006 )
Documentation of exercise activities is important to identify shortfalls that may exist in planning
and coordination, training, personnel, equipment, and facilities.

Immediately following the
exercise , participants should  conduct a “Hot Wash” to allow  each individual to provide
observations of what they considered to be challenge s or success es that may not have been
captured in formal evaluations. The info rmation provided in the Hot Wash should be included in
an After Action Report. After action reviews can provide valuable feedback on the effectiveness
Emergency Preparedness Guidelines for Levees
   15
 of policies and procedures, identification of areas for improvement , and suggestions to correct
deficiencies. Lessons learned during exercise s should be incorporated into th e emergency
preparedness plan and subsequent training sessions.
Emergency Preparedness Guidelines for Levees
   16
This page intentionally left blank
Emergency Preparedness Guidelines for Levees
   17
 VII. Importance of Community Outreach
Many owners  and operators  experience  difficulties obtaining the necessary funding and support
need ed to make repairs and improvements  to their respective levees . The best examples of well -
supported levee systems  are those that have ensured that local businesses and citizens understand
the flood hazard and the importance of the corresponding flood control system. While public
awareness activities are not required, the key to ensuring support from your community lies in
promoting a public awareness of the situation. Levee owner s and operator s may be able to
promote a greater awareness of key is sues through publications and planned public meetings, as
described below :
Provide Public Materials
Many people , especially those living downstream of a levee,  will take the time to read brochures
detailing local flood protection if material is made available . Levee owner s and operator s might
also release annual newsletters or articles for newspapers.

Information should be presented on
the following topics:
 Leveed a rea;
 How the system works ;
 Potential i mpact on the community and ongoing costs for regular operation and
maintenance ;
 Consequences of levee  failure;
 Local flood evacuation plans ;
 Historical overview of past floods and experiences ; and
 Flood response plans and procedures  – how the community can contribute .
Schedule Public Meetings
Unless there  is an actual flood, attendance at public meetings on flood control may be minimal ,
especially if the public is not properly informed on the issue . Levee owner s and operator s may
find it useful to combine such meetings with discussions on local  industry or other issues, or to
raise certain issues during community events. To bolster additional community preparedness,
levee personnel might ask to become involved with their public safety community’s annual or
special public awareness programs.
Awa reness of Adjacent Systems
Personnel  need to understand how adjacent sections of levees or components on private property
impact the larger system. Even though these components might not be situated within the area of
responsibility, the community could still be flooded if adjacent systems do  not operate properly.
Emergency Preparedness Guidelines for Levees
   18
Figure 7  - Volunteers raising emergency levee in Valley City, North Dakota
(Source: U.S. Army Corps of Engineers  Digital Visual Library , 2011 )
Emergency Preparedness Guidelines for Levees
   19
 VIII. Managing Incidents: Structure and Responsibilities
As previously stated, the responsibility for responding effectively to a levee -related emergency is
shared between levee owner s and operator s and local emergency management agencies . This
includes ensuring that an emergency preparedness plan has been dev eloped, personnel are
trained on  the plan, emergency operations centers are identified and maintained, and the plan is
periodically exercised  and updated . A specific person must be assigned dir ect responsibility for
coordinating these activities.
The emergency preparedness plan should include guidance  for determining when the plan will be
activated and who is responsible for the activation. It should clearly indicate who is in charge  of
the response and that the necessary operational and support personnel are  notified .

It must also
ensure that local emergency response activities are coordinated with the State and local
emergency management agencies , public safety officials , and other levee systems  where
appropriate. While local emergency management officials are often responsible for
communica ting with the general public, levee owners  and operators should ensure that those
announcements are based on accurate information and should be p repared to communicate
directly with the public , when necessary .
The basic incident management structure , identified in both the National Incident Management
System ( NIMS ) and Incident Command System ( ICS), consist s of the following elements:
 Incident Command er (individual  in charge) ;
 Operations (direction of field response) ;
 Planning (report status and develop ment of response strategy) ;
 Logistics (material, contractor and other support) ; and
 Finance  / Administration (general support and identify ing financial impacts) .
Incident Commander
There should  only be one individual  in charge of managing an emergency , and t he emergency
preparedness plan should clearly designate that  individual . While this may be senior
management , it may not always be the  case. Under the NIMS/ICS structure , this person is
designated as the Incident Commander although other designations more consistent with the
levee system  management  structure are also appropriate. Levee owner s and operator s should also
identify other indi viduals  who can serve  as alternates in the event the designated incident
commander is not available , or to relieve that person if  the situation continues for an extended
period of time .
The Inci dent Commander is responsible for  determining if the emergency preparedness plan
should be activated.

This could be based on potential flooding, sudden structural break, request
from the State or local emergency management agency , or a number of other situations  that, in
management’s  judgment, requires activation of the plan .
Once the emergency preparedness plan is activated, the Incident Commander will be in charge of
the overall emergency response effort , and will coordinate activities to identify and implement a
Emergency Preparedness Guidelines for Levees
   20
 response strategy, establish priorities , and resolv e any issues within the emergency management
structure.
The Incident Commander is also responsible for coordinating  and communicating the response
with the State and local emergency management agency, other government entit ies, adjacent
levee systems,  etc. In certain circumstances , these duties may be assigned to one or more people
such as a city/county liaison ( liaison officer) or a person responsible for external
communications ( public information officer) . Levee system  owners and operators are strongly
encouraged to establish relationships with State and local emergency management  agencies  and
public safety  officials  prior to an emergency in order to facilitate  the appropriate response during
an actual event.
Individual s designated as public information officers should have experience and/or training in
effective communications . They will be the primary points of contact to the public for the levee
system  during an emergency , and it is essential that messag es are  both accurate and timely.
Furthermore, e mployee and public safety is critical  during an emergency . Therefore, it is
important that responsibility for safety issues be given to a designated person who reports to the
Incident Commander.
Operations Section
The Operations section  is responsible for activities directly associated with responding to the
emergency. These commonly include assessing the impact to the levee system  and other
facilities, dispatching repair crews and equipment, identifying materials and contractor resource
requirements, and moving toward full restoration of normal operations.
This section is typically headed by the person responsible for day -to-day o perations,
maintenance , and/or construction activities  for the levee system .

As is the case with all
emergency management positions, a number of alternates should be designated to ensure
someone is always available and to provide relief  as the emergency co ntinues .
Depending on the size of the levee system , the Operations section can consist of a single person
or a number of people separated  by function ( e.g., maintenance, construction, water supply ), by
geogra phical segments ( e.g., North and S outh levee operations) , or in any manner that works
within the organizational structure of the levee system .
Planning Section
The Planning section collects, evaluates, and disseminates information regarding the nature of
the emergency. This information is used to pr ovide status reports within the emergency
management organization so that all members are informed of the nature of the emergency and
the progress  being  made . This could include manpower requirements, facilities impacted,
materials requirements , etc. Docum entation and status reports will greatly assist levee personnel
in maintaining a record of actions taken during the course of the emergency.
Under the NIMS/ICS structure, the Planning section, in coordination with other parts of the
management team, develops an overall strategy for responding to the emergency. However, that
Emergency Preparedness Guidelines for Levees
   21
 responsibility  can be assigned elsewhere such as  with the Incident Commander or the Operations
section.
The person responsible for the Planning section will vary depending on the size and complexity
of the lev ee system . One possibility  is the person responsible for engineering support , due to
their close working relationship with operations staff and technical knowledge of the levee
system . In a smaller system , this function could be combined  into the Operations section.
Logistics Section
This section is responsible for meeting emergency support requirements. These needs will vary
greatly , particularly in a sustained emergency situation. Examples include obtaining or
contracting for critical equipment and construction materials, fuel, transportation, emergency
communications, food serv ices, medical services, and  other items  needed by the responding
individuals .
This section should be led by the person responsible for general support services.

While the
makeup of this section will vary depending on the size and complexity of the levee system , input
will be needed from personnel  knowledgeable  in the areas of warehouse operations, purchasing,
facilities management, vehicle operations, telecommunications, and IT support.
Finance/Administrative Section
This section is responsible for providing financial and general administrative support during an
emergency. The Finance/Administrative section is particularly responsible for capturing the costs
associated with the emergency and ensuring that there are sufficient financial resourc es to
manage the incident . This  include s ensuring that payroll and ve ndor payment obligations are
met, obtaining additional cash or lines of credit to support emergency expenses, managing claims
issues , etc. This section is also responsible for providing general administrative support such as
clerical staffing.
The leader of this section should be the person responsible for financial matters for the levee
system . Other individuals who could take on this role are  those responsible for payroll, vendor
payments, and claims management.
Emergency Preparedness Guidelines for Levees
   22
Figure 8  - Incident Commander observes damage caused by flooding
in Westminster, Vermont (Source: FEMA  Photo Library , 2011 )
Emergency Preparedness Guidelines for Levees
   23
 Appendix A: Flood -Fighting Equipment3
Although each flood is unique, proper planning will improve response time and success. Levee
owners  and operators should maintain a  stockpile of necessary supplies and equipment used to
respond to typical high -water events. In a flood, stockpiled materials will provide the capability
to quickly initiate a preliminary response while additional mate rials and equipment are being
delivered.
The s pecific requirement for supplies depend s on the size of the levee system  and on past flood
events. The best way to determine the necessary quantities is to look at the supplies that were
utilized during previous floods. For example, if the levee system  historically uses 1,500 sandbags
in a flood response, a stockpile of 1,500 sandbags should be maintained in a protected area.
Sandbags
As stated above, levee owners  and operators should maintain an adequate supply of sandbags to
respond  to typical high -water events. Polypropylene and burlap are both suitable materials for
sandbags used in flood fighting activities.

All sandbags have a limited shelf life  and should be
inspected annually and replaced when necessary. The stockpile of sandbags should be stored in a
dry, protected  location that does not expose the sandbags to sunlight . Continued sunlight and
weather will rapidly deteriorate the sandbag material.
Plastic Sheeting
There are many applications for plastic sheeting during flood fights. If it is typically used in a
community during a flood fight and there is any doubt about  its availability during an
emergency, it should be stockpiled in preparation of an event. Six mil limeter  (6 mm)
polyethylene sheeting is the minimum  thickness recommended for flood fighting applications.
Sandbag Filling Equipment and Supplies
If the lev ee system contains areas where  large quantities of sandbags will be needed, a reliable
method for filling them is also needed . Levee owner s and operator s may consider investing in
equipment that will assist in completing this task in a more expeditious man ner. There are
several types of sandbagging machines available commercially , as well as other tactics utilizing
common equipment that can be employed to enhance sandbag filling efficiency.
Emergency Lighting
It is strongly recommended that levee systems contain  emergency lighting that is readily
available for use during flood fights.
3 Levee Owner’s Manual for Non -Federal Flood Control Works,
http://www.nws.usace.army.mil/Portals/27/docs/emergency/LeveeOwnersManual(final).pdf
Emergency Preparedness Guidelines for Levees
   24
Expedient Flood Fight Products
Industry has developed several temporary flood protection products that have proven to be
effective, and in many cases, more expedient to install than traditional sandbag levees. There are
numerous manufacturers of these products, although they typically fall into several primary
categories: water -filled bladders, lined baskets that can be filled with sand or other material , and
a wide varie ty of portable flood walls.
Communication System
A reliable communication system is vital to  coordinating flood fighting efforts and for calling for
assistance when needed. Cellular telephones work very well , but are limited in their capacity for
communi cating with multiple people at one time, potentially hindering rapid wide -spread
communication during emergencies.

Levee systems  may also experience  a service  disruption
during an incident if telephone traffic is very heavy . Given these potential problems, two -way
radios are preferable as they are extremely reliable for short distances and can broadcast to
several people at once.
Without a reliable communication system, any flood fighting effort will be much more difficult
and will probably require additional manpower. Advances in communication technology are now
enabling various communication s systems to “speak ” with one another without requiring  a
separate radio for each system. Many county and municipal public safety orga nizations are
replacing legacy communication s systems with these newer systems ; in many instances, specific
facilities such as nuclear power plants and prisons have been included in these upgrades . Levee
owner s may consider updating their systems  to help c onsolidate communications.
Riprap for Erosion
It is recommended that the levee owner s and operator s develop plans to address erosion that may
occur during a flood emergency. It might not always be necessary to stockpile riprap, but it is
important to know the location and telephone numbers of local quarries capable of supplying
riprap during an emergency. Some levee systems maintain a supply of gravel on site in order to
ensure  levee access routes during an emergency.
Floatation Vests
The safety of wor kers and volunteers should always be the highest priority during a flood fight.
Floatation coats or vests are recommended and should be worn at all times when working near
the riverward crest of the levee, riverward side slope, or near fast moving water. F loodwaters can
quickly sweep a person downstream, and hypothermia can set in quickly in cold water
conditions.
Pumps
Similar to sandbags, pumps are a critical part of any flood fighting effort. Pumps aid in
evacuating water inside the levee systems caused  by interior drainage and/or seepage through the
Emergency Preparedness Guidelines for Levees
   25
 levees. Care should be taken to anchor pump discharge hoses to prevent water discharge from
eroding levee material. Communities that experience frequent flooding should consider
purchasing one or more pumps that meet their specific requirements .

If additional pumps are
needed during a flood fight, the State or local government may make them available ; although
access will be prioritize d during an e mergency .
Sources of Borrow Material
Borrow sites for emergen cy levee repairs or construction should be identified in advance  of a
flood event . Special c onsideration should be given to accessing the borrow site, as well as
accessibility from the borrow site to the levee.
Emergency Preparedness Guidelines for Levees
   26
This page intentionally left blank
Emergency Preparedness Guidelines for Levees
   27
 Appendix B: Flood -Fighting Response Activities4
Phase I: Preliminary Response Activities
Upon receipt of official information forecasting imminent high water, levee owner s and
operator s should quickly mobilize a response team. All personnel involved in flood fighting
operation s should also be alerted immediately. If the levee system stretches  many miles, definite
sections of the levee should be assigned to individual  levee personnel.
There are many ways that the State  and local government  can assist during a flood. For example,
the State may provide trucks, tractors, radios, helicopters for emergency inspections, support
from the National Guard, and financial assistance. If a levee system  owner  runs out of supplies
needed for a flood fight,  it is advisable to ask for assistance  from  State  and local  governments; if
necessary, the State government will coordinate additional assistance from the Federal
government . Levee owners  and operators are also strongly encouraged to foster  relationships
with local emergency managers and the State emergency operations center ; it is also advisable to
include these stakeholders in exercises to ensure all personnel are prepared to respond to an
incident in a unified and coordinated manner . Emergency managers a nd emergency management
personnel should be kept informed of the condition of levee  systems  and ongoing situational
updates during a flood response.

It is vital that owners  and operators be aware of the type of
support th at State  and local governments  can provide, and who m to contact in order to receive
the necessary support.
In addition , during Phase I, levee personnel  should:
 Review emergency  preparedness  plans and lessons from previous incidents and exercises
and identify problem areas.
 Verify tha t personnel have access to gate keys, current rosters, listing of project features
and closings, plans, and other critical items.
 Coordinate efforts with communities upstream and downstream ;
 Alert the community to the potential for flooding. This will give  them advance warning
to take action and minimize potential damage to business es and home s.
 Ensure State and local emergency operations center s are informed of the situation ; and
 Begin documenting the situation , and  send situation reports to the State or local
emergency operations center, as appropriate .
Initial Project Inspection
As soon as notification of high water condition s is received, levee personnel should conduct
thorough inspections of relevant areas , omitting nothing from th e inspection based on adequate
performance during past high water events. In addition to the items that are typically inspected
during patrols (listed below), special attention should to be given to the following items during
4 U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Emergency Flood Fight Training Manual ,
http://cdm16021.contentdm.oclc.org/cdm/ref/collection/p16021coll11/id/1
Emergency Preparedness Guidelines for Levees
   28
 this initial inspection (note t hat several of these items can and should be accomplished annually
and not only during a high water prediction):
 Condition of any recent levee repairs ;
 Water conditions and any accumulation of trash, debris, ice, etc.

;
 Transportation: roads, rail, and water access ;
 Material: identify location, quantity, and conditions of all necessary tools and materials
(e.g., sacks, sandbags, lumber, and lights ) and distribute and store them at points where
maintenance is anticipated.
 Communication: locate and check a ll two -way radios and telephones ; and
 Drainage structures: most drainage structures are situated to convey interior drainage
from low points of the protected area through the levee by gravity flow. Due to  the
location, drainage structures are generally sub ject to inundation at lower stages than most
other project features, and special attention should  be given to flap gates and other
drainage structures that might not be accessible later.
Additional activities to complete during Phase I include :
 Review as signments for patrols, closings, etc. ;
 Obtain lists of all construction equipment, motorboats, cars, earthmoving equipment , and
trucks that can be made available.
 Assess needed support ( e.g., vehicles, radios) ;
 Verify serviceability of flood fighting equip ment ;
 Record ga uge readings and monitor river stages ;
 Close the levee to the public ;
 Install levee or floodwall closures as necessary. All road closings should be coordinated
with the corresponding authorities before limiting road or rail access through the levee .
 Remove all hazardous materials and/or explosives from the vicinity of the levee.
Patrols
In order to minimize damage and prevent the levee from failing, any problems must be detected
early and resolved accordingly . The entire levee should be p atrolled at least once per day during
Phase I and continu e during Phase II. Patrols should be conducted by teams rather than
individuals. Many of the tasks typically accomplished during high water inspections and patrols
are listed below. The following sec tion lists some typical responsibilities of patrols.
Patrol Responsibilities
General items
 Record ga uge readings (hourly) ;
 Inspect fences on the riverside of the levee frequently to make sure they are free from
debris.

If debris does collect along the fence, it must be cleared immediately or the fence
must be cut to free the debris and decrease the possibility of damage to the levee.
Emergency Preparedness Guidelines for Levees
   29
  Verify that all necessary access roads and ramps along the levee are usable or will be
satisfactorily conditioned.
 Take p hotographs of all signific ant issues (use date/ time stamp feature on the camera ,
when possible).
Levees
 Look for sandboils or unusual wet areas landward of the landside toe ;
 Look for slides or s lough ing in levee side slopes ;
 Look for wave wash or scouring  of the riverside levee slope ;
 Look for low areas in levee crown ;
 Monitor relief wells (flowing/non -flowing) ;
 Check flap/sluice gates for proper closure ; and
 Check gap closures (stoplog/sandbag, etc).
Floodwalls
 Look for saturated areas or sandboils landw ard of the floodwall ;
 Look for settlement (movement) of the floodwall ;
 Look for bank caving that may affect the structural stability of the floodwall ;
 Inspect toe drain risers (discharging/non -discharging) ;
 Inspect the landside of floodwall for any leakage, especially around the monolith joints ;
 Inspect for wet areas, soft areas, seeps, and sink holes landward of the toe of the
floodwall ; and
 Check gap closures (stoplog/sandbag, etc).
Pump Stations
 Verify proper ventilation (e.g., fans, vents) of the pumping plant to prevent overheating
of pump motors.
 Look for sink holes or wet areas around the perimeter of the pumping plant, and/or
settlement of the pump house . All of these conditions could potentially be the result of
separation in the conduits.

If separation is suspected, pumps and motors should be shut
down until an engineering review can be conducted to analyze the condition.
 Verify that assigned operators are on duty 24 hours daily.
Equipment for Patrols
 Portable radio or cell phone ;
 Watch ;
 Log book ;
 Patrolling instructions ;
 Plan of action for patrolling ;
 Plans of flood control project ;
 Operation and Maintenance Manual for the project ;
 Weather gear ;
 Flashlights ;
 Record Log ;
 Life j ackets ;
Emergency Preparedness Guidelines for Levees
   30
  Probing rod ;
 Short wooden stakes ;
 40 feet of  one-half inch (½”) nylon safety line to connect team members ;
 Camera ;
 Field boots ; and
 Hard hats .
Safety/Security Precautions
Members of the patrol team should walk side -by-side with one person on the  waterside of the
levee near the surface , one at the top of the levee, and one  on the landside toe of the levee. The
team should move slowly enough to enable  the member closest to the water to probe below the
surface with a rod in order to discover  any erosion that may be taking place. The person closest
to the wat er should be  wearing a safety line.
The person walking closest to the water should be especially observant of floating objects. The
limbs and roots of a floating tree that ha ve been uprooted can extend above the water surface and
strike anyone walking along the edge of the water. To increase the chance of identifying floating
objects, it is best to walk upstream when patrolling the waterside of the levee.
When patrolling floodw alls, the patrol should not attempt to walk along the top of the wall, but
rather concentrate on potential problem areas on the landside (inside) of the wall.

Where the wall
is more than five feet above the landside ground level, it is recommended that obs ervation points
be selected approximately every 100 yards, and ladders should be used to observe the waterside
of the floodwall.
Each person on the patrol should be thoroughly familiar with the community evacuation plan and
signals. If evacuation is neces sary, the patrolling organization should move to a predetermined
location and keep the team intact. When returning to the levees and floodwalls, physical
conditions may be considerably different from those observed prior to the evacuation, especially
if the levee was overtopped. If overtopping occurs during nightfall, it is recommended that the
patrols not resume until daylight, though there may be cases where this recommendation cannot
be followed.
Patrols should also be watchful for anyone that seems out  of place, or any activity that seems
suspicious. Some individuals , terrorists or otherwise, may try to take advantage of already
dangerous situations on levees or floodwalls. Any suspicious activities observed by the patrol
should be reported immediately to the local law enforcement agency, State and local fusion
centers, or the FBI.
General Maintenance Activities
Once the initial inspection has been completed, levee personnel should consider addressing any
pressing maintenance issues before the river rises further . Emergency maintenance activities are
no substitute for normal annual maintenance, and many of the activities listed below  should not
wait until high water  conditions.
Emergency Preparedness Guidelines for Levees
   31
 Drainage structures are generally subject to inundation at lower stages than most other
features of the flood control project . Therefore,  any potential maintenance problems
should be identified and corrected as quickly as possible before the water rises. All flap
gates that are in critical or questionable condition  should be m anually checked  and
repair ed as needed. Sluice gates should be inspected before the outlet end of the structure
becomes submerged, and any trash, debris, or other potential obstruction present should
be removed. If, for any reason, the gate system on a dra inage structure fails to operate
and cannot be repaired because of high water, immediate consideration should be given
to blocking the structure opening by other means.

If stream stages permit, the outlet end
of the structure should be blocked using timber , metal plates, tarps, sandbags, or other
means. If efforts to plug the outlet structure fail, immediate action should be taken to
build a sandbag or earth ring around the inlet structure. While the primary concern in
blocking the structures is to prevent high stages of the river from flowing into protected
areas, emergency closures should be such that they can be readily removed after the river
recedes.
 Immediate attention should be given to the grade line of each levee section or profile by
comparison of  existing grades with those shown in  ‘as built’ record drawings. Fill any
holes, gullies, and washes in the levee crown, embankments, and landside berms with
compacted fill material if possible, or otherwise fill them with sandbags .
 Examine all drainage d itches on the landside of the levee and remove any obstructions.
Be prepared to construct seepage drainage ditches, but not until actual seepage appears.
Excavation of ditches near the levee or in the long berm area is hazardous and should not
be undertake n except under direct supervision of appropriate personnel.
 Repair all levee settlement or depressions that have been worn down below levee grade.
Materials used to fill holes and depressions should be obtained from distant sources (not
adjacent to a levee system) unless it has been determined that borrowing in are as adjacent
to the levee will not adversely affect its stability or the control of underseepage. Avoid
taking material for these repairs from the area adjacent to the levee, particularly in the
area of the seepage berm, except under direct supervision of a ppropriate personnel. The
fill material should be compacted and protected from wave wash and other erosion as
necessary.
Interaction with the public
The patrol team may encounter  observers on the levees or at  the floodwalls. If there are many
observers, it is recommended that an additional person be assigned to each patrol team  to act as a
safety officer . The patrol team , however,  is not responsible to order observers off the levees and
floodwalls.

It is recommend ed that each team carry and distribute instruction cards describing the
community evacuation plan  in order to inform observers of the potential danger .
Emergency Preparedness Guidelines for Levees
   32
 Phase II: Full Response Activities
Continuing Activities
 Patrol continuously, 24  hours per day, 7 days per week  (as the situation requires) ,
especially if there are ponding areas during high water .
 Ensure all of the closures and gates are in place, and all maintenance is complete as
described in Phase I : Preliminary Response Activities .
 Remove padlocks from access gates to facilitate patrols ;
 Monitor inventory of flood fighting equipment, materials , and supplies as they are used ;
 Keep the public informed of the current situation through the media, if warranted ;
 Repair any erosion and seepage pro blems identified by patrols as quickly as possible ;
 Ensure competent pumping station operators are on duty whenever it appears that an
operation is imminent  during flooding events , even when station operation has been
automated. Operators should thoroughly  understand the manner in which the pumping
station was designed to operate and be capable of manual operation should automated
equipment or sensors fail.
 Use of portable pumps may be needed to pump water over the levee if water is ponding
in undesirable a reas or is rising too quickly in ponding areas.
 Monitor debris basins and trash  racks for sediment and accumulated debris ; and
 Remove debris from trash  racks at pumping stations periodically when the station is in
operation. As debris and sediment continue to be deposited in the basin, debris loads will
substantially block racks, and sediment deposits will block the entrance to the basin,
forcing the flow against the sides. Any large accumulation of debris on racks or flow
directed on the sides of basins will cause local erosion and scour. Levees and concrete
structures that are part of the debris basin facility will need to be closely monitored to
ensure optimal performance.
Evacuation Plan Activation
Levee personnel  should be ready to evacuate the area.

Consider the following points:
 Coordinate evacuation with police, fire department, and first responders  immediately ;
 Follow the predetermined routes ; and
 Meet in predetermined locations and immediately confirm the safety of all levee
personnel.
Volunteer Assistance
If it becomes necessary to recruit volunteers during the flood fight, there are a number of steps
that can be taken to organize their support.
 Identify primary and alternate assembl y areas with adequat e parking ;
 Arrange transportation, subsistence, and shelter for the labor force , as appropriate ;
Emergency Preparedness Guidelines for Levees
   33
  Contact media to request that volunteers report to the designated assembly area, bringing
flashlight s, work gloves, rain gear, shovel s, etc.
 Maintain a sign-in roster at assembly area to account for volunteers and personnel (name,
home telephone number, address, work group assignment , etc).
 Identify staging areas away from the work site but as close to the flood fight locations as
possible , and with clear  access to roads. Separate areas in the staging site should be
established for:
o Sandbag filling ;
o Carrying and loading ;
o Materials stockpiles ;
o Rest and breaks ; and
o First aid .
 Establish an emergency operations center to oversee the flood fight operations an d for
interagency coordination. This operations center should be staffed 24 hours daily until the
situation is resolved.

Consider equipping the emergency operations center with:
o Radios and telephones for communication ;
o Television and/or radio to monitor weather and river forecasts ;
o Emergency generator in case of power outages ;
o Flashlights ;
o Administrative supplies ;
o Levee operations and maintenance manuals ;
o Emergency preparedness  plans ;
o Past flood reports / after action reports ;
o State  and local  maps , utility, flood plain, and levee maps ; and
o Telephone books, rosters  list, and a directory listing numbers for railroad /
highway departments (needed when closing access), local contractors, Red Cross,
Salvation Army, hospitals, police , fire departments, State and local e mergency
operations centers, and other critical numbers .
 Establish traffic patterns that will be used to move sandbags from the staging area to the
work site. If conditions permit, one -way traffic patterns should be established on the
levee  system if trucks are going to be used to transport the filled sandbags .
 Be certain that the people laying sandbags are well supervised by a trained individual .
Phase III: Post -Response Activities
Once the water has subsided, the area should be returned to the pre -flood condition by taking the
following measures:
 Reopen any sluice gates that were closed once the water on the river side has receded to
three inches (3”) below the pond level on the protected side.
 Open all closure structures and properly store all components ;
Emergency Preparedness Guidelines for Levees
   34
  Remove and properly dispose of a ll temporary protection measures (e.g. , sandbags and
material placed during temporary levee raises) .
 Take an inventory of all remaining flood fight equipment, sandbags, plastic, and other
supplies. Rep air or replace damaged equipment, and restock supplies such as sandbags or
plastic in preparation for the next flood event.
 Salvage any materials and supplies (e.g.

, wood from flashboards) ;
 Return all borrowed equipment ;
 Identify whether remaining materials can be reused within the community ;
 Inspect the entire flood control work, noting locations of damage and the extent of
damage at each location.
 Meet with key personnel, volunteer representatives, and community partners  soon after
the event to debrief, share remaining concerns, and discuss lessons learned during the
event.
 Revise local emergency  preparedness  plans to account for lessons learned and changes to
recommended procedures.
 Document the event: keep a map record of the levee, indicating ar eas that were in distress
at the time of the flooding. This is useful for making repairs or improvements, and for use
as a guide to focus attention on these areas during the next flood event.
 Locate and keep records of the flood’s high water marks  for futu re planning ; keep these
records along with any rainfall and river data you may have gathered.
 Make repairs to the levee as soon as possible in preparation for a future flood  incident;
and
 Initiate  actions to provide permanent flood protection  measures  if the existing system
relies heavily on temporary solutions during emergencies.

