Flood Mitigation and Recovery--

Introduction
This manual describes a training exercise on post-flood mitigation and recovery. The
exercise simulates selected aspects of physical recovery from flood damage. The stage
is a single local government jurisdiction and the players are its key staff members.
Players are guided in creating their own scenario of flood damage and then led
through a series of tasks related to planning for repairs and rebuilding.
Why an Exercise?
Local police and fire departments know the value of exercises to help them prepare for
potential disasters. Through such exercises, they develop techniques to handle
extraordinary circumstances, make decisions under extreme pressure, and contain the
impacts of a disaster to the extent possible. Experience demonstrates that preparing in
advance improves performance when disaster strikes.
Weeks after a damaging flood, circumstances are still extraordinary, decisions are
made under extreme pressure, and the impacts continue rippling through the
community. As the need for emergency responders decreases, a new group of local
staff people--managers, planners, building officials, finance officers, and engineers--
face mounting responsibilities.

Shouldn't there be an exercise for them, too?
This exercise is primarily for this "second wave" of responders whose actions will play
an important role in shaping the rebuilt community. It is designed to provide them
with a preview of the issues and problems they will face in the hopes that, like the
emergency responders, they will be better prepared to serve their community
effectively after a flood.
How Does the Exercise Relate to Real Time?
The exercise takes 8 hours. During that time, players will complete tasks covering a
time period extending from a flood warning received 3-5 days before the flood to one
or two years after the flood. The tasks are arranged in approximate time sequence
starting with those that normally must be dealt with first. This linear time sequence of
Introduction, page 2tasks oversimplifies a complex, real situation in which tasks often must be addressed
simultaneously. The amount of time allocated to each task will seem too short. This
simulates, to some degree, the pressure after a flood to do an incredible amount of
work very quickly.
Introduction, page 3How Does the Exercise Relate to Actual Recovery?
Like any exercise, this one is a selective and approximate slice of real experience. It
consists of a series of interrelated tasks that local governments almost always must face
after a flood. The common links are that all the tasks must be done by local
government and all potentially affect options for repairs and rebuilding.
The exercise covers many of the tasks that local officials will face during recovery.
Each task in the exercise is realistic in that it will probably need to be carried out after a
flood, but not all post-flood recovery tasks are included. For example, much of
emergency response is not covered. Economic and fiscal matters are only tangentially
included, although they certainly impact physical recovery. FEMA disaster assistance
programs and requirements are not fully incorporated into the exercise, mainly because
it would take too much exercise time to fully explain the details to the players.
However, the tasks are generally consistent with provisions of FEMA's National Flood
Insurance Program.
The exercise does not reflect the intense political heat surrounding recovery. Players
will need to imagine the political context in their community as they are working the
exercise. Political issues pervade every task. After floods, local governments
commonly enjoy a brief suspension of political rivalry.

Distinctions between the
responsibilities of public and private agencies, federal, state, and local governments,
and city and county government departments may blur. Every organization and
person will be working together to address their common needs. But this does not last
long. Pre-flood political problems will soon reemerge to influence decisions about
long-term recovery.
Time is an important post-flood issue. The public may perceive that repairs and
rebuilding are taking too long. Anger and frustration stemming from feelings of
helplessness will often be vented at local public officials, particularly planners and
building officials, whose approvals may stand between people and their ability to
repair or rebuild damaged homes and businesses.
The exercise deals with common aspects of flood recovery; however, the unexpected
will happen. The failure of a flood control structure, for example, can mean rebuilding
an entire section of the community. Key staff people may be out of town or unable to
handle the pressure, or adverse weather may delay outside help. Contingencies like
these are part of the context of recovery. By learning as much as possible about the
"normal" tasks of post-flood recovery, local government staffs will be prepared to do
these with more ease, giving themselves a better chance of handling the "abnormal"
tasks effectively.
And finally, the exercise will give players the important advantage of forethought
when they face the inevitable flood, enabling them to help their communities recover
Introduction, page 4and rebuild quickly and effectively. Not only will they be better prepared for recovery
tasks, they will learn about the advantages of acting now to prevent flood damage.
Introduction, page 5What Are the Assumptions for the Exercise?
1.The city or county  conducting the exercise prepares for emergency response, plans
for community development, administers land development regulations, and issues
building permits.
2.The community participates in the National Flood Insurance Program and has
adopted a floodplain management ordinance meeting the minimum criteria in the
NFIP.
3.The players know their community well, but do not need to know much about
floods or recovery from floods.
Introduction, page 6
Facilitator's Instructions
Overview of Exercise Design
This exercise on mitigation and recovery after floods is organized into a series of tasks
which are to be completed in sequence.

Each task, labeled by a letter (A-L), has a time
limit ranging from 20 to 75 minutes. The tasks are in rough chronological order, but in
reality, many would be occurring simultaneously. Each task covers, at least partially,
an issue related to recovery that typically arises after a flood.
The exercise starts with a flood warning. Task A asks players to respond to the
warning and determine areas to evacuate. They begin to record information on a base
map of the community which is used throughout the exercise. Then in Task B, they
open emergency shelters. The flood arrives in Task C during which the players create a
damage scenario based on their best judgment of the impacts of a real flood,
considering that flood control structures may fail and debris carried by floodwaters
may cause additional damage.
The next tasks, usually part of emergency response, concern the rerouting of traffic in
Task D and restoring essential community services in Task E. Then, more information
is collected about the damage in Task F. These actions set the stage for early recovery--
finding temporary locations for displaced businesses and residents in Tasks G and H,
adopting policies for repair of damaged buildings in Task I, and adopting procedures
to process permits for repairs and rebuilding in Task J.
The emphasis then turns to planning for reconstruction with Task K to identify
planning opportunities and develop a plan for reconstruction of the floodplain.
Finally, the exercise ends with Task L to define mitigation actions that can be taken
beforehand to avert flood damage and prepare for long-term recovery and rebuilding.
Facilitator's Instructions, page 7All the tasks can be accomplished using typical local government background
documents, such as the general plan and zoning ordinance, supplemented by handouts
provided in this manual. A specific product or products will emerge from each task,
often providing input to subsequent tasks.
Throughout, it is important to remember that the primary value of the exercise is in the
process, rather than in the products. It is designed to educate staff members about their
likely tasks after a damaging flood. They will be able to apply this basic knowledge to
floods varying in size and impacts. As with any exercise, it is a first step.

Having
learned something of the process and problems, players will need to take further
actions to reduce potential damage and prepare for the inevitable tasks of rebuilding.
Facilitator's Instructions, page 8Overview of this Manual
This manual contains most of the information needed for you to facilitate the tasks and
for the players to complete the tasks. The manual is divided by large tabs into five
sections:  introduction, facilitator's instructions, exercise tasks, slide index, and
additional resources.
In the section labeled Exercise Tasks , you will find a series of small tabs identifying each
exercise task. Behind each of these tabs is a script, a one-page instruction sheet for
doing the task, and, for some tasks, handouts to be used by players during the task.
Scripts. Each task is introduced with a scripted slide show. The script
may be read or paraphrased. Each script tells what the task is, why it is
important, and how it has been carried out after recent floods. A one-line
description of each slide accompanies each paragraph of the script. This
line is in bold face italics and is not meant to be read aloud.
Instructions. The instruction page for each task is to be duplicated and
included in the packet for each player. This page states the purpose of the
task and lists the materials that will be needed to complete it, including
handouts. Then, the specific steps required to do the task are listed,
followed by a description of the product or products the task will
generate.
Handouts. Handouts, too, should be duplicated and included in the
packets. They are forms to be filled out as a product of the task.
The section of this manual labeled Slides  contains an index to the slides and a list of
slide sources.
Facilitator's Instructions, page 9Recommended Participants
The exercise has three categories of participants:
oFacilitator(s)- -the person or persons responsible for organizing the exercise,
providing information to the players before, during, and after the exercise, and
conducting the actual exercise.
oPlayers --those carrying out the prescribed exercise tasks.
oObservers --people invited to learn from the exercise by watching.
Who exactly should participate in each of these categories? The exercise is designed
with the following assumptions about participation.
Facilitator(s).

The facilitator should be skilled in running meetings and
knowledgeable about flood hazards, long-term recovery from floods, and flood hazard
mitigation. Someone from your state's floodplain management agency, hazard
mitigation office, or emergency services department could facilitate the exercise for
your community. The facilitator could also be a community's emergency services
coordinator or other staff member. Because the exercise emphasizes planning issues
during recovery, a community's city planner could be an excellent facilitator, either
alone or working with someone with emergency management expertise. A consultant
with appropriate qualifications is a possible choice. The facilitator must have the full
support of the community's chief administrative officer and be authorized to ask
assistance from staff members in preparing for the exercise.
Players. The players should include 8 to 12 local government senior staff members,
selected by the city or county manager. Staff members, such as the planning director,
building official, and public works director, who would be responsible for rebuilding
recommendations after a flood must be involved. Other possible players are the city or
county manager, emergency services coordinator, housing specialist, engineer, clerk,
attorney, parks and recreation director, and any other staff person who might have
recovery responsibilities. The police and fire chiefs need to be involved as the exercise
deals with some emergency response issues. However, it is wise to alert them that this
is not an emergency response exercise, and that others on the staff will probably be
taking the lead. Council members, local Red Cross personnel, or business persons may
be players. It is important to include those people who would be responsible for the
tasks in the exercise after a flood, regardless of their formal titles or roles.
Observers. Allowing non-players to observe the exercise is an effective way to spread
the benefit; however, it is optional. The decision would be made by the facilitator and
the participating jurisdiction. Observers could be other staff members from
participating departments, staff members from non-participating departments, elected
or appointed local officials, and community representatives. Staff members from other
Facilitator's Instructions, page 10nearby jurisdictions might also be invited. By including observers, a jurisdiction would
be increasing the impact of the exercise as a learning tool.
Facilitator's Instructions, page 11Recommended Schedule
The exercise can be completed in an 8-hour day with a break for lunch.

It is fast-paced,
calling for intensive effort from the players during the playing period. The schedule is
deliberately tight to give players some sense of the pressure and tension that would
pervade such tasks after a real flood. It can be done in a single day as shown in the
schedule below. However, it can be spread over two days, perhaps starting in the
afternoon of the first day and finishing at noon on the second day. By doing this, the
players have time to rest and bring fresh perspective to the important tasks which come
later in the exercise.
EXERCISE SCHEDULE
Minutes
8:00 -  8:30 Introductions/Explanations 30
8:30 -  9:10 Task A. Warning and Evacuation 40
9:10 -  9:30 Task B. Emergency Shelter 20
9:30 - 10:30 Task C. Damage Scenario 60
10:30-10:50 Break 20
10:50-11:10 Task D. Rerouting Traffic 20
11:10-11:30 Task E. Restoring Services 20
11:30-12:00 Task F. Damag e Assessment 30
12:00 - 1:00 Lunch 60
1:00 -  1:20 Task G. Temporary Business Locations 20
1:20 -  1:40 Task H. Temporary Housing 20
1:40 -  2:25 Task I. Policies for Damaged Buildings 45
2:25 -  2:45 Task J. Permit Processing 20
2:45 - 3:05 Break 20
3:05 -  4:20 Task K. Reconstruction Planning 75
4:20 -  5:00 Task L. Mitigating Flood Hazards 40
Facilitator's Instructions, page 12Materials Needed for Exercise
To conduct the exercise, you will need to assemble some readily-available supplies and
standard local documents. Below are lists of materials needed for the exercise.
Supplies. Supplies include a slide projector, screen, marking pens, map overlay
material (such as acetate, tracing paper, or mylar), tape, and push pins. A flip chart or
blackboard is not necessary, but can be used, as a supplement to the handouts, to
record information during the exercise.

A display timer, such as a kitchen timer, is
essential for you and the players to keep track of time during the exercise.
Base Maps. One or more copies of a base map of the community is essential. The map
should be the largest scale available that can fit on the table. It should show major
properties, streets and bridges, important facilities, and, if available, parcel boundaries.
If the jurisdiction is geographically large, a table-top sized base map will not show both
the whole jurisdiction and individual parcels. You may wish to select a part of the
floodplain as a focus for the exercise and provide large scale maps covering the selected
area. In this case, a map of the entire jurisdiction should also be provided for context
and perhaps for use in some of the early tasks.
Documents. The instruction sheets contain a list of materials to use for each task. Most
of these are common local government documents and should be readily available. If
documents are not available, the tasks can still be done relying on the players'
knowledge of the community. Documents to collect, if available, are:
oFlood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or most recent NFIP map
ofloodplain management ordinance
oinformation on previous floods
ocommunity plan and plan diagram
oemergency response plan, including shelter plans
oredevelopment or downtown plans
ozoning ordinance and maps
oprocedures for processing planning and bui lding permits
olists of historic buildings
Other relevant materials, such as census data, housing plans, or economic development
plans, may be useful and should be provided, if readily available.
Player Packets. You will need to provide each player with an exercise packet,
containing 12 instruction pages and 10 handout pages. You may also wish to prepare
packets for observers so they may follow the action. The packets should be clipped (not
Facilitator's Instructions, page 13stapled) or placed in a binder. The pages should be collated according the sequence of
the tasks. Following is a list of the packet pages in the order they should be assembled.
Facilitator's Instructions, page 14Contents of the Player Packets
Handout 1 Exercise Schedule
Handout 2 Color Key for Mapping Information
Handout 3 Task Leaders an d Other Assignments
Handout 4 Recommended Actions
Instructions Task A.

Warning and Evacuation
Handout A Actions in Response to Flood Warning
Instructions Task B. Emergency Shelter
Instructions Task C. Damage Scenario
Instructions Task D. Reroutin g Traffic
Instructions Task E. Restoring Services
Instructions Task F. Damage Assessment
Handout F Damage Assessment
Instructions Task G. Temporary Business Locations
Instructions Task H. Temporary Housing
Instructions Task I. Policies for Damag ed Buildings
Handout I Policies for Damaged Buildings
Instructions Task J. Permit Processing
Instructions Task K. Reconstruction Planning
Handout K Planning Opportunities
Instructions Task L. Mitigating Flood Hazards
Handout L1 High-Priority Actio n to Reduce Flood Risk
Handout L2 Contacts for Technical and Financial Assistance
Facilitator's Instructions, page 15Suggestions for Conducting the Exercise
1.Select as players 8 to 12 high-level staff persons to form a small working group in
which each player can interact freely with all others. Invite additional staff
members to observe.
2.The success of the exercise depends on total concentration of all players for the
entire day. If possible, arrange to conduct the exercise away from the normal work
place to reduce chances for interruption.
3.The exercise is tightly timed. Let players know that they must be on time for the
exercise and clear their schedules to prevent interruptions.
4.Find a room that can be darkened for showing slides. The room should have a table
the players can sit around to work on the base map and a wall on which maps may
be attached with tape or push pins.
5.Provide for refreshments during the breaks. Thinking burns up energy.
6.Exert control to keep the exercise on the time schedule. Discu ssion should be
discouraged while you are reading the scripts. Discussion can take place while the
players are working on the tasks.
7.Whenever possible, add a few local slides with brief descriptions to the slide
presentations. Slides showing past floods in the community, buildings in the
floodplain, or elevated structures can be added at the appropriate places in the task
introductions.

Doing this can help the players see the local relevance of the many
examples in the presentations from around the country.
8.If the facilitator is not a staff member, he or she needs to secure the support of the
jurisdiction's chief executive officer and coordinate with a designated staff person.
That staff person must be able to verify that the key players will commit the full day
to the exercise and help with local arrangements.
Facilitator's Instructions, page 16Facilitator's Checklist
Checklist
Before Exercise
qObtain authorization from CAO, council, or other appropriate body.
qSet date and time.
qReserve meeting room.
qDetermi ne players and arrange with the CAO for them to
participate.
qInvite observers, if desired.
qArrange for slide projector and screen.
qProvide materials for map overlays, pens, push pins, and tape.
qObtain copies of the jurisdiction base map an d parcel maps.
qAssemble documents
qAssemble player packets.
qStudy task scripts and instructions.
qAcquire local slides and make additions to the script.
qPlace the slides in order in slide carousels.
During Exercise
qUse the script an d slides to introduce the exercise and each task.
qTime the tasks and facilitate their timely completion.
qAnswer questions and assist players with the tasks.
qOversee creation of a list of high-priority actions to reduce flood risk.
After Exe rcise
qContinue to work with players on the high-priority actions to
reduce flood risk.
Facilitator's Instructions, page 17
Exercise Tasks
In the section labeled Exercise Tasks , you will find a series of small tabs identifying each
exercise task. Behind each of these tabs is a script, a one-page instruction sheet for
doing the task, and, for some tasks, handouts to be used by players during the task.
Scripts. Each task is introduced with a scripted slide show. The script
may be read or paraphrased. Each script tells what the task is, why it is
important, and how it has been carried out after recent floods. A one-line
description of each slide accompanies each paragraph of the script. This
line is in bold face italics and is not meant to be read aloud.
Instructions.

The instruction page is to be duplicated and included in the
packet for each player. This page states the purpose of the task and lists
the materials that will be needed to complete it, including handouts.
Then, the specific steps required to do the task are listed, followed by a
description of the product or products the task will generate.
Handouts. Handouts, too, should be duplicated and included in the
packets. They are forms to be filled out as a product of the task.
SCRIPT -- INTRODUCTION TO TASKS
(15 minutes to read the script)
Slide 1. Flood Mitigation and Recovery-An Interactive Exercise for Local Governments
This is a flood mitigation and recovery exercise designed for local government officials.
The exercise introduces you to some of the tasks you will face when a damaging flood
strikes your community.
Slide 2. Exercise tasks
The exercise is organized into a series of twelve tasks which are to be completed in
sequence. The tasks are listed on the screen. Each task is identified by a letter A
through L.
The exercise starts with heavy rains and a flood warning. In the first task, Task A,  you
decide how to respond to the warning and what areas to evacuate. Then, in Task B ,
you determine how to provide emergency shelter for the people evacuated. The flood
arrives in Task C  and you determine its extent and major impacts.
Next come typical tasks during emergency response-- Task D  rerouting traffic around
washed out bridges and roads and Task E  restoring essential services to the
community. Then, more information is collected about the damage in Task F . This task
sets the stage for early recovery--finding temporary space for displaced businesses and
residents in Tasks G and H  and adopting policies and procedures for the repair,
removal or rebuilding of damaged buildings in Tasks I and J .
The emphasis then turns to planning for reuse of the floodplain with Task K  during
which you prepare a reconstruction plan for the flooded area. Finally, the recovery
exercise ends with Task L . In this task, you recap the problems encountered in the
previous tasks and detail high-priority actions that can be taken beforehand to avert
flood losses and prepare for rebuilding.
Slide 3.

Exercise schedule
Here is a schedule of the exercise showing the amount of time allocated to each task.
You each have a copy of this schedule in your packet ( Handout 1 ). Times range from 20
to 75 minutes. The amount of time allocated to each task will seem much too short.
This simulates, to some degree, the time pressure you will experience after a flood. In
addition to time for the tasks, this introduction will take about 20 minutes and you will
have a 20-minute break in mid-morning and mid-afternoon. One hour is allocated for
lunch. The entire exercise will take until 5:00 this afternoon.
Slide 4. Exercise purpose
The primary purpose of the exercise--shown here--is to improve the ability of local
governments to recover from damaging floods. We think it will do so in the ways
listed here.
oTraining non-emergency personnel in recovery tasks. Fire fighters and police
officers receive training to prepare them to handle disasters; most other staff people
rarely do. This exercise is designed primarily to train non-emergency staff in tasks
that come after emergency workers are through.
oPassing on experience from cities that have rebuilt. Many jurisdictions have had
damaging floods. The exercise content draws from these experiences.
oProviding a chance for hands-on experience. The exercise gives you a chance to
apply general information about recovery and rebuilding to your specific
circumstances.
oEncouraging preparations for recovery and rebuilding. The exercise will help you
see how you can prepare now to handle typical recovery tasks more effectively after
a flood.
oEncouraging actions to reduce flood damage. Once you see how tough recovery
will be, we think you will want to initiate actions now to reduce the potential
damage in your community.
Slide 5. Topics not covered
The exercise covers recovery from flooding along rivers and streams usually caused by
heavy rainfall. It does not cover coastal flooding or other kinds of storm damage. Nor
are all aspects of recovery covered. The slide lists some significant omissions.

Most of
emergency response  is not covered, such as search and rescue and debris removal.
Economic and fiscal matters  are only tangentially included, although they certainly
impact physical recovery.
FEMA disaster assistance  programs and requirements are not incorporated into the
exercise, but you need to recognize that FEMA requirements will affect nearly every
post-flood activity. Much of what takes place after a flood responds to requirements of
the local floodplain management ordinance adopted as a condition for participating in
the National Flood Insurance Program. The tasks in the exercise are consistent with
those requirements, but the details of the program are not incorporated.
The exercise does not incorporate your community's political context . As you work the
tasks, it will help to keep in mind the major political issues in your community. After a
flood, there may be a brief suspension of political rivalries, but this does not last long.
What you can and cannot accomplish will depend a great deal on political factors.
Slide 6. Flood recovery timeline
This is a timeline showing typical lengths of time to accomplish the tasks in the exercise
after a real flood. The timeline is divided into three sections:  1) pre-flood warning
shown in white, 2) short-term recovery running from the flood to about 2 months
shown in light gray, and 3) long-term recovery running from about 2 months to two
years shown in dark gray. Actual rebuilding can take much longer than 2 years, and
mitigating flood hazards is an ongoing process. Almost all of the tasks are started
during early recovery, but many of them extend into long-term recovery. Today you
get to do the tasks one at a time, but as you can see here, after a real flood, you will be
doing many of them simultaneously.
In general, the tasks take longer after a flood than people expect. This means that you
start the recovery effort with unreasonable expectations for a speedy recovery. People
are likely to feel that repairs and rebuilding are taking too long. The procedures and
permits you require may be seen as obstacles to the quick reoccupancy of flooded
homes and businesses. The recovery process is permeated by tension between the
desire for speed and the need to take time to ensure responsible rebuilding.
Slide 7. Task structure
Each task in the exercise is organized the same way.
Introduction.

Each task is introduced with a slide presentation with background
information to help you with the task. The slides show how the task has been handled
by communities after real floods. The introductions average about 5 minutes.
Instructions. Your packet contains one-page instruction sheets telling you the steps to
take to complete each task. You will want to take time to read the instructions before
you start work.
Handouts. For some tasks you will find handouts in your packet consisting of forms to
be filled out during the task.
Products. You will produce something in every task. Products consist of information
added to the map and entries on handouts.
Slide 8. What players need
You do not need to be a recovery expert to do these tasks. You need working
knowledge of your community  and some idea of the effects of floods . You have here a
collection of background documents  and maps to help you with the tasks. The
materials include your community plan and land use diagram, zoning ordinance and
maps, emergency response plan, and any available redevelopment plans and lists of
historic buildings. You also have the flood hazard information available for your
community, including your Flood Insurance Rate Maps issued by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency and your floodplain management ordinance. You
can refer to these items throughout the exercise as questions arise.
Here is a base map  covering the community. You will be recording information on this
map throughout the exercise. You also have  a set of colored pens  for adding
information to the map. Handout 2  tells you which color to use for each category of
information to be mapped.
Slide 9. Getting started
Before you start the exercise, you need to organize yourselves to do the work. First,
you need to select a player to take the lead on each task. The selections can be recorded
on Handout 3  in your packet. The task leader will be responsible for keeping the
discussion on track and helping the group reach some decisions before the timer goes
off. We will also ask the leader to give a two-minute (or less) summary of the results at
the end of each task, focusing on any problems encountered and recommended actions
to overcome them.
You also need to select a player to be group recorder.

This should be someone whose
position on the city staff is somewhat peripheral to the topics covered in the exercise.
For example, the planning director or building official would not be a good choice, but
the city clerk or personnel director might be. This person will fill out the handouts
with particular attention to Handout 4. Recommended Actions  which is filled out at the
end of each task. If available, a flip chart or a blackboard may be used in place of
Handout 4 . The recorder will then recap the recommended actions listed on Handout 4
as part of Task L.
In addition, you may want to select the artist among you to draw on the map.
Now, open your packet and review the four handouts. Take a minute to look them
over. Then go right to selecting the players to fill the various roles. We will start the
introduction to Task A as soon as you have made your selections.
Handout  1
EXERCISE SCHEDULE
Minutes
8:00 -  8:30 Introductions/Explanations 30
8:30 -  9:10 Task A. Warning and Evacuation 40
9:10 -  9:30 Task B. Emergency Shelter 20
9:30 - 10:30 Task C. Damage Scenario 60
10:30-10:50 Break 20
10:50-11:10 Task D. Rerouting Traffic 20
11:10-11:30 Task E. Restoring Services 20
11:30-12:00 Task F. Damage Assessment 30
12:00 - 1:00 Lunch 60
1:00 -  1:20 Task G. Temporary Business Locations 20
1:20 -  1:40 Task H. Temporary Housing 20
1:40 -  2:25 Task I. Policies for Damaged Buil dings 45
2:25 -  2:45 Task J. Permit Processing 20
2:45 - 3:05 Break 20
3:05 -  4:20 Task K. Reconstruction Planning 75
4:20 -  5:00 Task L.

Mitigating Flood Hazards 40
Handout 1
Handout 2
COLOR KEY FOR MAPPING INFORMATION
COLOR INFORMATION ON MAP
Yellow o  floodway and 100-year floodplain
o  temporary housing
Brown o  areas evacuated
o  temporary business locations
Green o  emergency shelters
o  road blocks, alternative traffic routes
Blue o  area flooded
o  parcels with buildings over 50% damaged
Orange o  areas with concentration of pre-FIRM
o  historic buildings
Purple o  major facilities (schools, hospitals, government
buildings, etc.)
o  areas with impaired access
Red o  washed out bridges and roads
o  areas affected by loss of utilities
Black o  damaged utilities
o  buildings to be demolished
o  areas subject to moratorium on rebuilding
Handout 2
Handout  3
TASK LEADERS AND OTHER ASSIGNMENTS
TASKS LEADERS
Task A. Warning and Evacuation
Task B. Emergency Shelter
Task C. Damage Scenario
Task D. Rerouting Traffic
Task E. Restoring Services
Task F. Damage Assessment
Task G. Temporary Business Locations
Task H. Tempo rary Housing
Task I. Policies for Damaged Buildings
Task J. Permit Processing
Task K. Reconstruction Planning
Task L. Mitigating Flood Hazards
Mapper: ______________________________
Group Recorder:________________________
Handout 3
Handout 4. RECOMMENDED ACTIONS
TASKS ACTIONS Priority
Task A
Warning and
Evacuation
Task B
Emergency
Shelter
Task C
Damage
Scenario
Task D
Rerouting
Traffic
Task E
Restoring
Services
Task F
Damage
Assessment
Task G
Temporary
Business
Locations
Task H
Temporary
Housing
Task I
Policies for
Damaged
Buildings
Task J
Permit
Processing
Task K
Reconstruction
Planning
Handout 4
SCRIPT -- TASK A. WARNING AND EVACUATION
(You have 10 minutes to read the script. )
Slide A1. Task A. Warning and Evacuation
Most floods arrive with some warning. A well-prepared response to a flood warning
can save lives and prevent property damage.

In Task A you will decide how to
respond to a flood warning which ____________________ (community) just received
that the _______________ River will crest at about 9:30 this morning.
Slide A2. Woman with child watching storm clouds
Here you see a woman holding a child and watching with worry an approaching
storm. The most basic warning system is simple observation. Typical river and stream
flooding is preceded by unusually long or intense rainfall. Heavy rain means large
amounts of water entering rivers and streams. Rising water levels are readily observed
by anyone.
Slide A3. National Weather Service office
However, it is risky to rely just on personal observation. Sometimes flooding can occur
from rainfall elsewhere in the watershed. Personal observation will not tell you how
much of the rain will flow into the stream, when the flood will reach its peak, or how
high it will be. Fortunately, the National Weather Service has a system for issuing
flood warnings which relies on scientific observations of rainfall and runoff patterns.
Here you see a Weather Service office where the information is collected and analyzed.
The Weather Service notifies your state emergency management agency when a flood
could occur. This is called a "flood watch."  It also issues a "flood warning" when
flooding is imminent or already happening. The state notifies you if it has received a
"watch" or "warning" affecting your community. You may also receive the notification
directly from the Weather Service.
Slide A4. Form for an official flood warning
This shows the form used for an official flood warning issued by the National Weather
Service. The warning tells when and where flooding is expected. Sometimes the
warning predicts the height of the expected flood in feet above "flood stage."  Someone
in your local government is designated to receive the warning and take appropriate
actions. It may be the city manager, the police chief, or your local emergency manager.
Slide A5. Flood warning siren
This person's first task is to warn people who may be in danger. There are many ways
to do this. A siren, as shown here, is often used. A siren is effective if people know
what it means and what to do when they hear it. Some communities rely on getting the
message out by radio, or they send policemen with bullhorns to vulnerable
neighborhoods.

Sometimes, emergency responders go door-to-door warning people.
Regardless of how the initial warning is delivered, it must be accompanied by
information telling people what to expect, when, and what actions they need to take.
Slide A6. Cross section of floodplain
Warnings are not useful unless you have identified the areas subject to flooding--
usually low-lying areas adjacent to rivers and streams or other drainage channels.
These areas are called floodplains. As shown on this cross section, a floodplain is
composed of a channel defined by the banks of a stream; a floodway which carries the
bulk of floodwaters, particularly the high velocity floodwaters; and a flood fringe
which carries low velocity floodwaters that are not as deep as in the floodway.
Slide A7. Terms for flood frequency
The 100-year floodplain is the area that would be flooded by the 100-year flood. The
100-year floodplain is a conventional measure of flood vulnerability and is used by
FEMA as the basis for requirements in the National Flood Insurance Program. The
slide defines a 100-year flood and a 1% flood. The terms are two ways of saying
exactly the same thing. The 100-year flood is a statistical approximation saying that
over many, many centuries such a flood will occur on the average of once every 100
years. It has a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any one year. Two points are
important:  1) Floods much larger than the 100-year flood can and do occur, and 2) It is
possible for a 100-year flood to occur two or three years in a row. It has the same
probability of occurring each year.
Slide A8. Flood insurance map showing A, B, and C zones
FEMA provides flood-prone communities with maps showing the 100-year floodplain.
The most commonly used maps are called Flood Insurance Rate Maps or FIRM's. This
slide shows a FIRM. Zone A on the map is the 100-year floodplain. The numbers
shown in Zone A are elevations above sea level. Zone B is the 500-year floodplain and
Zone C is outside the 500-year floodplain. Interestingly, more than 30% of the flood
insurance claims have been for damage to properties outside Zone A.

Vulnerability to
floods does not stop at the 100-year flood line or even the 500-year flood line. The map
shows gradations in risk from flooding. Local officials must evaluate the information
they receive about the severity of the approaching flood and decide what areas to
evacuate.
Slide A9. Evacuating people, Elmira, New York
People are often in danger in homes and businesses located in low-lying areas, but may
be reluctant to leave. Communities need a plan for evacuation before a flood strikes.
The plan should identify the steps needed to evacuate those in danger and avoid
desperate, last-minute attempts to help people to safety like you see here. These people
are being evacuated by boat from downtown businesses in Elmira, New York long after
the arrival of floodwaters. You may decide to exercise your community's emergency
powers by ordering evacuation. People need to know safe routes to take and where
they can go until the emergency has passed. You may need to assist the elderly,
handicapped or other people with special needs. You also may be asked to provide
some security for evacuated properties.
Slide A10. Flood-damaged vehicles
This shows cars and trucks swept up in a flood. When a flood is expected, it is very
important to direct traffic to high and dry roads. About 90% of the people killed in
flood disasters in the United States have been in cars swept away by floodwaters. It is
easy to mistake both the depth and velocity of water on a road.
Slide A11. Sandbagging in downtown Salt Lake City
The first priority is always to ensure the safety of people, but with warning of a flood, it
is often possible to protect property from flooding, too. This shows a street in
downtown Salt Lake City before the flood in 1984. Sandbags line both sides of the
street creating a channel for floodwaters to pass through the city. Thousands of people
were mobilized within hours to place the sandbags overnight. The frantic effort saved
many millions of dollars in property damage.
Slide A12. Moving furniture from a house
Here furniture is being moved from a house about to be flooded. Individuals and
business can use warning time to move important records, furniture and other items to
upper stories of buildings or to high ground.

Local government can prepare the
Emergency Operations Center or relocate it if, like so many, it is in a basement subject
to flooding. Anything that can be done to prevent damage will make your life easier in
the days, weeks, and months after the flood.
Slide A13. Now begin Task A.
Now turn to the instructions for Task A in your packet. Take time to read the steps
before you begin. Please ask for help, if you need it. You have 30 minutes to decide
how to respond to this morning's flood warning.
Reminder to Facilitator:  Be sure to set the timer for 30 minutes.
INSTRUCTIONS -- TASK A. WARNING AND EVACUATION
(Time to complete the task:  30 minutes)
Purpose
Anticipate the impacts of a 100-year flood on your community and determine
appropriate actions to respond to a flood warning.
Materials
oBase map o f the community showing parcels, roads, bridges, major facilities, and
topography, if available.
oThe most recent maps issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) for the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). Most communities have
Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM's); however, some communities still use earlier
maps called Flood Hazard Boundary Maps (FHBM's). In this exercise, NFIP maps
are called FIRM's.
oHandout A. Actions to Respond to a Flood Warning
Steps
1.Transfer the boundarie s of the 100-year floodplain from your FIRM to the base map
using a solid line ( yellow ). If your FIRM shows the floodway, transfer those
boundaries to the base map using a dotted line ( yellow ).
2.Assume you have just received a warning from the National  Weather Service that
the stream passing through your community is expected to reach flood stage at 9:30
a.m. List on Handout A the actions you will take to protect people and property.
3.On the base map, outline the road and bridges you will blockade  (orange ) and the
areas you will evacuate, including those that you think will be flooded and those
that will lose access ( brown ).
4.How well prepared are you to respond to a flood warning?

Discuss any problems
you uncovered in your system for responding to a flood warning, and on Handout 4.
Recommended Actions, list actions you can take now to improve the system.
Products
oBase map showing: 1) boundaries of the floodway and 100-year floodplain, 2) roads
and bridges closed, and 3) areas evacuated
oCompleted Handout A. Actions in Response to Flood Warning
oEntries on Handout 4. Recommended Actions
Instructions--Task A
Handout A
ACTIONS IN RESPONSE TO FLOOD WARNING
Who receives the warning and has responsibility to act?
What areas will you warn and how? How will you warn those with special needs
(handicapped, elderly, etc.)?
What areas will you evacuate? How long do you think it will take?
Where will you send the evacuated people? What routes will you designate?
What actions will you take to protect property from flood damage?
Handout A
SCRIPT -- TASK B. EMERGENCY SHELTER
(You have 5 minutes to read the script. )
Slide B1. Task B. Emergency Shelter
Task B is to estimate shelter needs and identify safe buildings and locations for shelters.
Emergency shelters address the immediate and pressing human needs for food, shelter,
and care for people who have been evacuated from their homes.
Slide B2. Red Cross disaster services center tent
The Red Cross is responsible under Congressional charter for setting up and managing
emergency shelters. This shows a Red Cross disaster services center tent. The Red
Cross mobilizes quickly and is typically on the scene before the flood hits.
Slide B3. Emergency shelter, Santa Cruz, California
Here you see the inside of an emergency shelter in a community center. Shelter
locations are usually predetermined; schools, churches, armories, and other public
buildings can be used, but schools are the most common. If shelter costs are to be
reimbursed by FEMA, Red Cross must approve shelter sites before they are opened.
Slide B4. People entering emergency shelter in Elmira, New York
These people are entering an emergency shelter in a high school in Elmira, New York
during the 1972 flood. As you can see, rain is still falling and floodwaters are
perilously close to the building.

The shelter may have to be abandoned and the people
evacuated a second time. It is important to select shelter sites that are safe from
flooding and other hazards. Also, note the dog headed for the shelter with its owner.
Pets are not permitted in Red Cross shelters, and local officials are often called on to
provide shelter for pets as well as people.
Slide B5. RV in front yard
Not all displaced people use shelters. Lower-income people and people without family
or social ties in the community are most likely to need shelter. According to the Red
Cross, about 25% of the people displaced by any disaster (including floods) seek public
shelter. The rest find shelter with family or friends or make other arrangements. This
shows an RV placed in the front yard of a flooded property for shelter. Motels can also
be an important source of emergency shelter. Red Cross can issue vouchers, ultimately
paid for by FEMA, for short stays in motels.
Slide B6. Now begin Task B.
Now turn to the instructions for Task B. You have 15 minutes to define the need for
emergency shelters and decide which ones to open.
Reminder to Facilitator:  Be sure to set the timer for 15 minutes.
INSTRUCTIONS -- TASK B. EMERGENCY SHELTER
(Time to complete the task:  15 minutes)
Purpose
Determine emergency shelter needs and how to meet them.
Materials
oBase map with information from Task A
oEmergency response plan
Steps
1.Look at the evacuated areas on the base map and estimate how many housing units
have been evacuated and how many people are without shelter (number of
households  X  persons per household). On the average, about 25% of people
displaced by a disaster seek public shelter. From the information provided in the
script and your knowledge of your community, decide what percentage of the
evacuees will need emergency shelter and enter the number of people below.
Number of people needing emergency she lter:  ____________
2.Decide how many shelters to open to accommodate those in need, using the best
information you have about shelter capacities. Then choose which shelters to open,
making sure that you select ones that are outside the floodplain, accessible in times
of flooding, and safe from other hazards.

Outline the selected sites on the base map
(green ).
3.Discuss any problems you identified in your planning for emergency shelter, and
on Handout 4. Recommended Actions, list actions you can take now to improve your
ability to shelter displaced people.
Products
oBase map showing location of emergency shelters you have opened
oEntries on Handout 4. Recommended Actions
Instructions -- Task B
SCRIPT -- TASK C. DAMAGE SCENARIO
(You have 1 5 minutes to read the script. )
Slide C1. Task C. Damage Scenario
The flood warning proved warranted. A 100-year flood has struck your community.
Along the _________________ (river or stream), water, mud, and debris are
everywhere. Debris blocks the passage of floodwaters through culverts and under
bridges and areas thought to be out of harm's way are flooded. Some bridges are out
and at least one flood control structure has failed (if there are flood control structures
on the stream). Many residences and commercial and industrial buildings are heavily
damaged. Several public buildings can no longer be used. Buildings constructed
before _______________ entered the National Flood Insurance Program in 19___ fared
poorly.
The rest of this script presents information about the types of flooding and the areas
and buildings most vulnerable to flood damage. This is to help you decide how a large
flood would impact your community and where the damage will be located.
Slide C2. Rivers converging at Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Here is the confluence of the Allegheny and Monongahela rivers at downtown
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. They join here to form the Ohio River. It's hard to believe
looking at this peaceful scene that these rivers can become raging torrents.
Slide C3. Same scene with rivers flooding
Here is the same scene with the rivers on the rampage. Over 22,000 communities in the
United States are subject to flooding from rivers and streams. Year in and year out,
floods cost the federal government more money in disaster assistance than all other
types of disasters put together. Flooding in the Mississippi River system in 1993 caused
almost $20 billion in damage. Riverine flooding is a serious problem throughout the
nation.
Slide C4. Chemung River flooding in Elmira, New York
Riverine flooding has many faces.

This shows the Chemung River flooding in Elmira,
New York in 1972. River flooding is most often caused by too much rain falling over a
prolonged period of time. The stream channels cannot contain the runoff and overflow
their banks. Flooding occurs in areas adjacent to the streams.
Slide C5. Flash flood in Buffalo Creek, West Virginia
Some floods are flash floods. This shows damage from a flash flood which struck
Buffalo Creek in West Virginia. Flash flooding is a very dangerous form of riverine
flooding. It typically occurs following intense rain over a short time in a small
watershed. The flooding often comes unannounced and the floodwaters are fast-
moving and destructive.
Slide C6. Failed dam in Rocky Mountain National Park
Flash flooding can also occur because of the failure of a dam or other water retention
structure. Here you see the Lawn Lake Dam which broke in Rocky Mountain National
Park. The resulting flood struck the town of Estes Park, Colorado, causing extensive
damage.
Slide C7. Floodwater channel in mountainside, Rocky Mountain National Park
This shows the channel scoured by water surging down the mountain following the
dam break. The channel, shown here years after the dam failure, is still completely
denuded of trees, underbrush, and soil. Inundation maps showing the areas that
would be flooded if a dam totally fails with a reservoir at full capacity have been
prepared for all "high-hazard" federal dams.
Slide C8. Ice-covered river at Oil City, Pennsylvania
Flooding can be caused by ice jams breaking up in the spring or on warm winter days.
Here you see the ice-covered Allegheny River at Oil City, Pennsylvania. As the ice
begins to thaw, it breaks into large blocks which begin to tumble downstream and can
jam the river channel at natural bends, bridges, culverts, and other constricted areas.
Slide C9. House damaged by ice in Peoria, Illinois
This shows a house in Peoria, Illinois damaged by ice carried in the floodwaters on the
Illinois River.
Slide C10.

Alluvial fan adjacent to the Colorado River
Flooding can be particularly severe on alluvial fans--fan-shaped, areas formed by
streams at the base of mountains or the mouths of ravines where the water abruptly
loses speed, spreads out, and deposits sediment. This shows an alluvial fan on the
California side of the Colorado River below Lake Havasu.
Slide C11. Factors contributing to flood damage
Factors that determine how damaging a flood will be include its depth , velocity ,
duration , amount and kind of debris , the integrity of flood control structures , land uses
in the watershed and floodplain, and the quality of building construction . The first
three factors are primarily a function of the characteristics of the storm. Other things
being equal, deep water, fast moving water, and water that stays for a long time cause
extra damage.
Slide C12. Debris in floodwaters, West Virginia
The kind and amount of debris in flood waters is a critical damage factor. Here you see
the impact of debris carried by floodwaters in West Virginia. Water-borne debris--
trees, cars, parts of buildings--acts as battering rams, capable of demolishing bridges,
levees, and buildings. Debris can dam up culverts and other restricted areas in a
stream channel causing overflows to be deeper and more extensive than predicted on
flood hazard maps. When hydrologists map 100-year floodplains for FEMA, they
consider only clear-water flooding; however, floodwaters are rarely free of debris.
Slide C13. Broken floodgate, Folsom Dam
The integrity of flood control structures is also a critical damage factor. This is a 1995
photo of a broken floodgate at Folsom Dam above Sacramento, California. People in
the highly urbanized area downstream were lucky--the dam did not fail completely
and little damage was done. However, damage can be very severe when structures
designed to prevent flooding fail or are overtopped by floods larger than they were
designed to handle. The FIRM's are drawn assuming that flood control structures will
work as intended. This is not always the case. During the 1993 Midwest floods, over
1,000 of the 1,500 levees along the upper Mississippi River and lower Missouri River
broke or were overtopped.

About one-third of damaging floods in the United States
involve the failure or overtopping of a levee or floodwall intended to protect a
community from flooding.
Slide C14. New houses behind a dike along the Sacramento River
Another problem with flood control structures is shown here. This man is standing on
a dike along the Sacramento River. He lives in one of the new homes, shown on the
right, that were built after the dike was constructed. The homes are in a frequently-
flooded basin totally surrounded by rivers and, now, dikes. With the dikes in place,
these houses and a 17,000-seat sports arena were built and developers are proposing to
built another 33,000 houses in the basin. Property and lives are now at risk in this
previously undeveloped floodplain. Another homeowner in this area, a city council
woman, recognizes the inherent risk by storing a rowboat on her roof.
Slide C15. Watershed development, Laguna Beach, California
This shows a developed hillside in southern California. Watershed development can
increase the frequency and height of floods. Paved surfaces prevent the soil from
absorbing rainfall, thus increasing runoff. The runoff is collected in storm drains and
storm channels and sped to streams and rivers, contributing to flood flows. Sometimes,
existing storm drains are too small to handle the runoff from new development causing
backups and local flooding.
Slide C16. Structures in the floodway, Guerneville, California
Some buildings and facilities are particularly prone to flood damage because of their
locations, construction, or function. Buildings located in the floodway, such as these
houses on the Russian River in northern California, are flooded frequently. Structures
like these in the floodplain, particularly in the floodway, can also raise the height of
floodwaters by reducing the carrying capacity of the floodway. They can also redirect
floodwaters to areas that might otherwise be out of danger.
Slide C17. Pre-FIRM building
"Older" buildings like this one, called pre-FIRM buildings, are those constructed before
the community entered the National Flood Insurance Program usually sometime in the
1970's.

As a condition for entering the program, the city had to adopt floodplain
regulations requiring new residential buildings in the 100-year floodplain to be
elevated to or above the level of the 100-year flood. New commercial buildings must
be either elevated or floodproofed. Buildings constructed before the city adopted such
regulations are usually more vulnerable to flood damage.
Slide C18. Elevated houses in floodplain
This shows buildings in the floodplain. The two houses at the bottom of the slide are
constructed on fill and the gray house across the road from them is elevated. Access to
the elevated houses is lost, but people in the houses and their contents appear secure.
Elevated buildings like these are obviously less vulnerable to flooding than non-
elevated structures.
Slide C19. Damaged mobilehome in Estes Park, Colorado
Mobilehomes are particularly vulnerable to flood damage. The force of the water can
knock them off their supports or foundations and toss them about like toys. This
mobilehome in Estes Park, Colorado was destroyed by a flash flood in 1982.
Slide C20. Scenic river road in northern California
Scenic roads like this one in northern California, as well as busy interstate highways,
often follow the course of rivers and streams. Floodwaters can overrun the roads, wash
out sections, and leave them impassable for days and weeks after a flood.
Slide C21. Submerged bridge
Bridges are a critical lifeline in many cities tying two parts of a community together or
providing an essential link to the outside world. This shows a bridge in the Midwest
submerged by flooding in 1979. People living in the houses in the background are now
cut off from the other side of the river.
Slide C22. Sewage treatment plant during flood
Water and sewage systems are especially vulnerable to flood damage. This shows a
sewage treatment plant which just escaped flooding because it is elevated on fill.
Treated sewage is typically discharged into the nearest body of water. This means that
treatment plants are usually located in floodplains next to rivers or streams. Damage to
the plants often means that untreated sewage is discharged into the floodwaters
leading to potential health hazards and pollution problems.
Slide C23. Water pumping station in Hull, Illinois
Other utilities are also vulnerable to flood damage.

This shows a water pumping
station in Hull, Illinois, protected by sandbags from flooding in 1993. Without the
emergency sandbagging, the community would have been without water.
Slide C24. Unlabeled drum on Mississippi River
Floodwaters and hazardous materials don't mix well. This shows an unlabeled drum
floating down the Mississippi River near Hannibal, Missouri. The dilemma for
emergency responders in situations like this is deciding what to do. The drum could
carry explosive or toxic materials, posing an additional danger to riverside
communities already faced with flooding. All tanks and drums holding hazardous
materials must be labeled and tied down.
Slide C25. Now begin Task C.
Now it's time to begin Task C and create your own flood damage scenario. You have
45 minutes to complete this task.
Reminder to Facilitator:  Be sure to set the timer for 45 minutes.
INSTRUCTIONS -- TASK C. DAMAGE SCENARIO
(Time to complete the task:  45 minutes)
Purpose
Identify the significant impacts of the flood, using judgment and the best information
available to you.
Materials
oBase  map showing information from Tasks A and B
oInformation on the effects of previous floods in your community
Steps
1.Identify at least one culvert or bridge where debris has piled up obst ructing the
passage of floodwaters. Also, identify at least one flood control structure that has
failed (if there are any on the stream). This could be a berm, levee, floodwall, dam,
or channel modifications.

Then, draw the boundaries of the area actually flooded
considering the failed flood control structure(s), clogged culvert(s), and low-lying
areas with drainage problems ( blue ).
2.Outline flood damage on the base map as follows:
a)all flooded areas with a concentration of unelevated or non-flood- proofed
buildings in the floodplain ( orange ).
b)major facilities, such as hospitals, schools, emergency operations centers, police
and fire stations, and other government buildings that have at least temporarily
lost access or function ( purple ).
c)bridge s, roads, and other transportation facilities which have been washed out
by the flood ( red).
d)utilities including water and sewage treatment facilities and pipelines, power
substations, and gas and electric distribution lines damaged in the flood ( black ).
3.Review your evacuation areas and redraw the boundaries if needed ( brown ).
Estimate how many additional people will need emergency shelter: __________. On
the base map, show any additional emergency shelters that will be opened ( green ).
4.Could any of this damage have been avoided? On Handout 4. Recommended Actions,
list actions you can take now to avert damage in future floods.
Products
oBase map showing the major impacts of the flood
oEntries on Handout 4. Recommended Actions
Instructions -- Task C
SCRIPT -- TASK D. REROUTING TRAFFIC
(You have 5 minutes to read the script. )
Slide D1. Task D. Rerouting Traffic
In Task D you decide how to manage the flow of traffic to compensate for washed-out
bridges and roads.
Slide D2. Washed-out bridge in Puerto Rico
The loss of bridges and roads severely hampers a community's return to normal
functioning after a damaging flood. Here is a bridge washed out in Puerto Rico in
1985. Its loss prevented travel on the major east-west highway in Puerto Rico, forcing
long detours. Most flood damaged bridges and roads can be quickly patched up and
reopened, but a major bridge or highway can take months, even years, to replace. In
the meantime, alternate routes must be found.
Slide D3.

Traffic control at a washed-out road
The first task in managing traffic flow is to prevent travel on unsafe roads or bridges.
This shows a barricade alerting drivers that the road is impassable. Local officials may
need to close low-lying roads and vulnerable bridges when a flood warning has been
received. Control of traffic continues during the flood and on into the recovery period.
Slide D4. Map of emergency traffic routes, Salt Lake City
Once the flood has passed, the emphasis shifts to adjusting traffic patterns to the fact of
washed out roads and bridges. New routes around the damaged sections need to be
selected and designated so that drivers know what to do. This is a map designating
emergency traffic routes through Salt Lake City during the 1984 flood. As you will
recall, the city used a main street through town as a channel for floodwaters. Traffic
was diverted to either side of the flooded street, as shown here.
Slide D5. Detour graded around washed-out road
As we see here, traffic patterns can sometimes be restored temporarily pending
permanent repairs. Sometimes detours can be quickly graded around washed out
portions of roads.
Slide D6. Temporary "Bailey" bridge
Sometimes temporary bridges can be installed. This temporary "Bailey" bridge was
quickly erected by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers to replace a washed-out bridge
over the Carmel River after northern California floods of March 1995. This one-way
bridge permitted traffic flow across the river until a permanent bridge could be built. It
can take many months to design and construct new bridges and major highways.
Slide D7. Railroad cars used as temporary bridge
One interesting way to provide a temporary bridge is to use railroad cars. This
clipping tells of using 12 flatbed railroad cars welded together to form a temporary
bridge in California's Central Valley. Flooding in March 1995 washed out the bridge on
Interstate 5 crossing Pasajaro Creek. With the temporary bridge in place, travel
resumed less than a week after the flood on Interstate 5--California's most heavily-
traveled north-south truck route. Permanent replacement is expected to take at least six
months.
Slide D8.

Boat used for access
Another temporary way to ease the impact of a lost bridge or highway is to use boats.
The only way to get to this house is by boat. Ferries can be used to carry people across
rivers where bridges have been washed away.
Slide D9. Now begin Task D.
Now, turn to the instructions for Task D. Your primary tool is the base map. You have
15 minutes to complete this task.
Reminder to Facilitator:  Be sure to set the timer for 15 minutes.
INSTRUCTIONS -- TASK D. REROUTING TRAFFIC
(Time to complete the task:  15 minutes)
Purpose
Reroute traffic to provide temporary access to areas of the community cutoff by
washed-out bridges or roads.
Materials
oBase map with information from Tasks A-C
Steps
1.On the base map, review the roads and bridges lost in the flood and areas evacuated
because of loss of access. Mark where roadblocks will be needed and draw in
detours ( green ).
2.Note below other possible ways, such as ferries, temporary bridges, etc., to restore
access to the areas you have identified. Consider the impacts of the flood on other
means of transportation including rail, boat and airplane:
_________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________
______________________ ___________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________
3.What problems rerouting traffic and providing access do you foresee? Could any
be averted by planning ahead? On Handout 4. Recommended Actions,  list actions that
might be taken now to avoid the problems identified.
Products
oBase map marked to show alternative traffic routes
oList of actions to overcome access problems
oEntries on Handout 4. Recommended Actions
Instructions -- Task D
SCRIPT -- TASK E. RESTORING SERVICES
(You have 5 minutes to read the script.)
Slide E1. Task E. Restoring Services
The ability to deliver essential services to people is often destroyed by a flood. Quick
restoration is essential to protect public health and safety. Task E is to identify areas
without services and determine how to restore services quickly.
Slide E2. Severed utility lines to house in Farmington, Utah
Utility systems are particularly vulnerable to flood damage. This shows a house in
Farmington, Utah flooded in 1982.

All the underground utility lines serving the house-
-water, sewer, gas and electric have been severed. A debris blockage diverted
floodwaters to the road. The road was undermined and collapsed, destroying the
buried utility lines.
Slide E3. Flooded electric power substation, Keithsburg, Illinois
Areas without essential services need to be identified quickly to plan for meeting the
needs. This electric power substation in Keithsburg, Illinois was flooded in the
Midwest floods of 1993. Residences and businesses in Keithsburg lost power as a
result.
Slide E4. Temporary above-ground water connection in Inverness, California
Floods and mudslides in the small Tomales Bay community of Inverness in northern
California destroyed the water pipes feeding water from a spring into the distribution
system. This shows a temporary above-ground water line which restored water service
to residents and businesses. In areas left without water, the Red Cross can arrange for
water to be trucked in. If it appears that repairs to the system will take weeks or
months, a temporary, above-ground distribution system like this one makes sense.
Slide E5. Damaged city hall/EOC, Hull, Illinois
The loss of other public facilities also brings the need for immediate adjustments. This
shows the city hall, containing the EOC, in Hull, Illinois damaged in the 1993 Midwest
floods. The man is standing in front of the Post Office, next door to City Hall, pointing
out the high water mark on the building. Obviously emergency response operations
needed to based somewhere else during the flood.
Slide E6. Sandbagged school
This shows a school flooded in the Midwest floods of 1993 in spite of community
efforts to protect it with sandbags. Damage to school buildings is particularly difficult
for a community. Schools are often needed for emergency shelter. Also, after the flood
has passed, the ability to resume normal school hours and activities is a crucial step in
restoring a sense of normality to family and community life after the trauma of the
disaster.
Slide E7. Now begin Task E.
You have 15 minutes to decide how to handle  service disruptions caused by this
morning's flood.
Reminder to Facilitator:  Be sure to set the timer for 15 minutes.
INSTRUCTIONS -- TASK E.

RESTORING SERVICES
(Time to complete the task:  15 minutes)
Purpose
Make plans to temporarily restore essential utilities and public services until permanent
repairs to the flooded facilities are completed.
Materials
oBase map with information from Tasks A-D
Steps
1.On the base map, review the information you have added showing flooded utility
facilities and lines and public facilities. Outline areas that would be affected by
service disruptions, especially water and sewer ( red).
2.In the space provided below, note the key actions you will take to restore utilities
and public services until permanent repairs can be completed.
_________________________________________________________________
____________ _____________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________ _
_________________________________________________________________
3.What problems do you foresee in restoring vital utilities and public services to the
community? On Handout 4. Recommended Actions, list actions that might be taken
now to avoid the problems identified.
Products
oBase map marked to show areas with disrupted utility service
oList of actions to restore essential utilities and public services
oEntries on Handout 4. Recommended Actions
Instructions  -- Task E
SCRIPT -- TASK F. DAMAGE ASSESSMENT
(You have 5 minutes to read the script.)
Slide F1. Task F. Damage Assessment
Task F is to assess the flood damage. This task fine tunes the damage scenario
completed in Task C, looking beyond areas to individual buildings. After a real flood,
your state emergency management office will want detailed damage assessments of
flooded facilities to determine what disaster assistance your jurisdiction will be eligible
for. You also need this information to determine needs for recovery and rebuilding.
Slide F2. Helicopter used to assess damage, Thistle, Utah
This helicopter is being used for the initial assessment of damage from the flood which
engulfed Thistle, Utah in 1983. The town was totally inaccessible except by air. This
initial assessment is often done as a "windshield" survey by the Red Cross, police chief
or other local officials. The purposes are to grasp the overall magnitude of the damage,
identify situations requiring immediate emergency response, and begin to assess
recovery needs.

It is followed by a more formal "preliminary damage assessment" to
estimate numbers of flooded buildings and the dollar value of the damage.
Information from the preliminary damage assessment is forwarded to the state and
possibly to the federal government as the basis for a disaster declaration.
Slide F3. Building with red tag in Albany, Georgia
The assessment of individual structures results in the posting of all inspected buildings,
usually with a red, yellow, or green tag. Here you see a flood-damaged building in
Albany, Georgia with a red tag just beneath the eave on the righthand door. This
means "unsafe, do not enter or occupy."  A yellow tag means "limited entry, off limits
to unauthorized personnel." A green tag means "inspected, no restriction on use or
occupancy."  When in doubt, it is wise to err on the side of safety by using a red tag. It
can be changed later to yellow or green based on more careful evaluation.
Slide F4. Classifying flood damage to buildings
This list shows information you need to collect about each flooded building-- use or
occupancy, location with respect to the floodway and 100-year floodplain, percent
damage, historic status . In assessing damage, it is important to classify flooded
buildings according to their use and occupancy so you can anticipate the recovery
needs of displaced residents, businesses, and public services. Also, building use is
important because the flood insurance program has different requirements for
residential structures than for other buildings. Let's look at the reasons for the other
items on the list.
Slide F5. Houses flooded in Thistle, Utah
First, all flooded buildings need to be assessed, whether or not they are in the 100-year
floodplain. This shows houses damaged by a flood in Thistle, Utah caused by a
landslide which blocked the river, creating a lake where before there was a town. In a
world that operated according to statistical models, these buildings would not be
flooded. They are outside the 100-year floodplain. However, more than 30% of claims
for flood insurance are for damage to properties located beyond the 100-year
floodplain. This is because no flood is exactly like the model 100-year flood chosen as
the basis for flood disaster planning and mitigation.
Slide F6.

Building in 100-year floodplain
This is a building in a 100-year floodplain. Damaged properties in the 100-year
floodplain, as shown on maps issued by FEMA, come under the requirements of the
National Flood Insurance Program. As a participant in the program, your community
has a floodplain management ordinance specifying conditions for the repair and
reconstruction of flood-damaged buildings in the 100-year floodplain.
Slide F7. Building with more than 50% damage
Here is a flooded house with damage obviously exceeding 50% of its market value.
Under FEMA's minimum requirements for local floodplain management ordinances,
buildings like this can be repaired only if they are brought up to full code compliance
including elevation to or above the 100-year flood level.
Slide F8. Categories for percent damage
Many communities use three categories in assessing percent damage, as shown here--
up to 40%, 40% to 60%, and more than 60%. The middle group (40%-60%) brackets the
buildings which might have 50% or more damage. Making this determination is
strictly a local responsibility under the National Flood Insurance Program. Often real
estate appraisers are needed to assist with this difficult and politically-sensitive task.
Slide F9. Flood-damaged historic building
This shows an historic building damaged in the 1993 Midwest floods. Procedures for
handling damaged historic buildings are more complex than for non-historic
structures. Local governments are constrained by both federal and state regulations
from permitting the demolition of historic buildings after disasters. So, it is important
to identify historic buildings in the damage assessment.
Slide F 10. FEMA GPS system for damage assessment
FEMA is beginning to apply a new "high-tech" way to assess damage quickly after a
natural disaster. Using a global positioning system (GPS) giving latitude and longitude
combined with digital photos, FEMA is able to accurately locate flooded areas and
damaged structures. In the 1994 floods in Atlanta, Georgia, FEMA provided the city
with a data file of 5,000 flooded buildings two weeks or so after the flood. This shows
a similar product developed following the 1993 Midwest floods.
Slide F11. Now begin Task F.
Please turn to the instructions for Task F to conduct your own damage assessment. You
will also find Handout F --a table to record the information.

You have 25 minutes to
complete this task.
Reminder to Facilitator:  Be sure to set the timer for 25 minutes.
INSTRUCTIONS -- TASK F. DAMAGE ASSESSMENT
(Time to complete the task:  25 minutes)
Purpose
Determine the extent of damage and number of damaged buildings.
Materials
oBase map with information from Tasks A-E
oExisting land use map or land use plan
oLists of historic build ings
oHandout F. Damage Assessment
Steps
1.Based on information you have recorded on the base map and your knowledge of
the community's building stock, fill out Handout F. Damage Assessment  as follows:
a)In column 1, enter your estimate of the tota l number of flood-damaged buildings
in each land use category.
b)In column 2, enter your estimate of the number of flood-damaged buildings in
each land use category that are located in the 100-year floodplain.
c)In column 3, enter your estimate of the number of flood-damaged buildings in
each land use category with damage amounting to 50% or more of their pre-
flood market value. As a rule of thumb, consider that at least 10% of the
damaged buildings in the 100-year floodplain will have 50% or more damage.
Buildings constructed before about 1975 (or whenever your community entered
the NFIP) are most vulnerable.
d)In column 4, enter your estimate of the number of flood-damaged historic
buildings in each land use category.
e)Estimate the number of build ing inspectors you will need to complete the
damage assessment in 3 to 5 days. Enter the number on Handout F .
2.On the base map, outline in blue  parcels with buildings damaged 50% or more.
Place an orange "H"  on parcels with damaged historic buildings.
3.Could you be better prepared to conduct a post-flood damage assessment? On
Handout 4. Recommended Actions, list actions that might be taken now to make this
task easier after a flood.
Products
oBase map showing buildings damaged 50% or more and damaged historic
buildings
oCompleted Handout F. Damage Assessment
oEntries on Handout 4.

Recommended Actions
Instructions -- Task F
Handout F
DAMAGE ASSESSMENT
1
# Damaged
buildings2
In 100-year
floodplain3
50% +
damage4
Historic
Residential
Commercial
Industrial
Public
Totals
Number of building inspectors needed to complete assessment in 3-5 days:
_____________
Handout F
SCRIPT -- TASK G. TEMPORARY BUSINESS LOCATIONS
(You have 5 minutes to read the script.)
Slide G1. Task G. Temporary Business Locations
In Task G, you will select facilities and sites for temporary business locations.
Businesses that cannot open their doors soon after a flood usually fail, losing clients to
competing businesses--often in other jurisdictions. Quickly providing a place where
displaced businesses can set up shop can help prevent business failures and allow
businesses to provide necessary goods and services to the community during recovery.
Slide G2. Flooded retail street in Georgia
Not all damaged businesses will needed new locations. Many, like these stores flooded
in Georgia in 1994, will be able to clean up and reopen quickly, if only on the sidewalk.
Local government can help this process by quickly removing mud and debris so that
commercial streets can be opened.
Slide G3. Flooded businesses along the Russian River, Guerneville, California
If you look closely you will see the tops of a sign and light standards belonging to a gas
station in Guerneville, California during the January 1995 flood on the Russian River.
This commercial area is in obvious trouble.
Slide G4. Businesses operating from trailer in Guerneville, California
Here is the same location a month later. The owner installed a temporary building to
house the gas station, deli and mini-market and was back in business about two weeks
after the flood. Workers are replacing floors, wallboard, and wiring in the flooded
building shown on the right and the owners expect to reoccupy it in another month.
Slide G5. Flood sale in Guerneville, California
Here we see a parking lot, also in Guerneville, being used by local merchants as a
makeshift outdoor market. Sometimes a community has vacant commercial space or
land that can be used temporarily for displaced businesses.

Cities can work with local
business associations and property owners to identify sites that might be used
temporarily by displaced businesses.
Slide G6. Portable janitor in Montpelier, Vermont
You also may need to provide space for businesses coming into the community to help
with recovery. This is a "portable janitor" set up in a park in Montpelier, Vermont in
1992 to help people clean up after a flood.
Slide G7. Napa Auto Parts, Guerneville, California
Outlets that are part of a chain have resources for recovery not available to
independent, local businesses. This shows a Napa Auto Parts store in Guerneville,
California set up for business in a temporary building with a trailer to store inventory.
This outlet can draw on resources from its parent company and is likely to recovery
more quickly than local stores. After a flood, residents receive help from a variety of
sources including the Red Cross and FEMA, but local businesses are basically left on
their own to recover. Cities can help most by effectively managing overall recovery
and working cooperatively with local businesses.
Slide G8. Criteria for temporary business locations
Good temporary business locations are vacant , accessible  and safe from further flood
damage. They should be close to the damaged commercial district  to encourage
retention of patrons. The facilities or sites should be readily provided with utilities  and
parking . If private property is used, it is best if it is planned and zoned for commercial
uses .
Slide G9. Now begin Task G.
The instruction page for Task G tells you how to find temporary business locations.
You have 15 minutes to complete the task.
Reminder to Facilitator:  Be sure to set the timer for 15 minutes.
INSTRUCTIONS -- TASK G. TEMPORARY BUSINESS LOCATIONS
(Time to complete this task:  15 minutes)
Purpose
Provide sites and facilities for business operations until damaged commercial buildings
can be repaired or replaced.
Materials
oHandout F. Damage Assessment
oBase map with information from Tasks A-F
oCommunity plan, redevelopment or downtown plan
oZoning map
Steps
1.Assume that several small businesses have been flooded and the buildings cannot
be immediately reoccupied after the flood. Select vacant facilities suitable as
temporary business locations, if available.

Also select suitable sites for temporary
commercial structures. Look for vacant and available sites that are accessible and
close to the pre-flood location of displaced businesses. The sites should have
utilities available, and plenty of parking. Outline the facilities and sites in brown
on the base map.
2.Could the businesses in your community be better prepared to survive a flood? On
Handout 4. Recommended Actions, list actions that the community might take now to
improve post-flood business survival.
Products
oBase map showing facilities and sites selected for temporary business locations
oEntries on Handout 4. Recommended Actions
Instructions -- Task G
SCRIPT -- TASK H. TEMPORARY HOUSING
(You have  5 minutes to read the script )
Slide H1. Task H. Temporary Housing
In Task H, you estimate the need for temporary housing and identify resources,
including sites for temporary housing, to meet the need. Temporary housing bridges
the gap between the time emergency shelters close and people are able to find long-
term housing. It is important to help keep that gap as short as possible for as many
people as possible.
Slide H2. Bucket brigade in Utah
After a flood, the first step is to help as many people as possible return to their homes
quickly. This means doing many of the things noted earlier--removing mud and debris
from streets, providing access, and restoring utility services. Community efforts can
help people get back into their homes. Here we see a bucket brigade bailing out a
flooded basement of a house in Utah.
Slide H3. Person bailing out his house
This man in Cheyenne, Wyoming is bailing out his house on his own. In many cases,
cleanup is all that is needed for a family to reoccupy a flooded house or apartment.
Local officials can help by providing information about how to dry and clean water-
soaked and muddy wallboard, flooring, carpeting, appliances, and other household
possessions.
Slide H4.

Vacancy sign
Vacant apartments, like this one, and hotel or motel rooms can serve as temporary
housing for people who cannot move quickly back into their flooded residences.
Housing vouchers are sometimes issued by HUD to help families pay the rent for this
kind of temporary housing.
Slide H5. People applying for housing assistance at a DAC
In some cases, you may have no alternative but to provide temporary housing
structures. Generally, low-income households have the greatest and longest need for
temporary housing. This shows people applying for housing and other assistance at a
Disaster Assistance Center.
Slide H6. FEMA trailers
This is a FEMA trailer. FEMA considers trailers a last resort and makes them available
sparingly. The agency prefers that they be placed on the individual flooded properties,
but sometimes this is not possible. You may need to create a temporary housing
development using trailers, RV's, prefab housing, or some other easily erected
structures. Once the infrastructure for housing is in place, such property typically
continues to be used for similar housing after the temporary housing has been
removed.
Slide H7. Criteria for temporary housing sites
Good temporary housing sites are vacant , accessible , and safe. They can be easily
provided with utilities . If possible, they should be close to public services  and the
former neighborhoods  of those being housed. Available public land  is often used
giving public control over reuse of the property when housing is removed. If private
land is used, it should be planned and zoned for housing .
Slide H8. Now begin Task H.
In the next 15 minutes, you are to estimate the need and select locations for temporary
housing. Please turn to the instructions for Task H.
Reminder to Facilitator:  Be sure to set the timer for 15 minutes.
INSTRUCTIONS -- TASK H. TEMPORARY HOUSING
(Time to complete the task:  15 minutes)
Purpose
Help people find housing after the emergency shelters have closed and before
damaged housing is repaired or replaced.
Materials
oNumber of people needing emergency shelter from Task B
oBase map with information from Tasks A-G
oHandout F. Damage Assessment
oCommunity plan and zoning map
Steps
1.Revi ew Handout F.

Damage Assessment  and your estimate of shelter population from
Task B. From this information and your general knowledge of the income,
ethnicity, age, and special needs of the community's population, estimate the
number of households needing temporary housing. As a rule of thumb, you can
assume that about 10 percent of the shelter population will need assistance with
temporary housing (divide by average number of persons per household to get
number of units).
2.Identify on the base map ap artment buildings, hotels, and motels which were not
flooded and are likely to have vacant units which could be used to meet part of the
need for temporary housing ( yellow ).
3.Select sites with suitable infrastructure to be used for trailers or prefab ho using,
considering that the selected sites could continue to be used for housing after the
need for temporary housing has passed. Outline the selected temporary housing
sites in yellow  on the base map.
4.Does your community have adequate housing progr ams now which could be used
to aid flood victims? On Handout 4. Recommended Actions, list actions that the
community might take now to help people bridge the gap between emergency
shelters and permanent rehousing.
Products
oBase map showing sites selec ted for temporary housing
oEntries on Handout 4. Recommended Actions
Instructions -- Task H
SCRIPT -- TASK I. POLICIES FOR DAMAGED BUILDINGS
(You have 5 minutes to read this script.)
Slide I 1. Task I. Policies for Damaged Buildings
In Task I you apply policies in your local floodplain management ordinance to
determine the fate of flood-damaged buildings. FEMA establishes minimum policies
which must be incorporated in local ordinances as a condition for participation of the
community in the National Flood Insurance Program. This script describes those
policies.
Slide I2. Broken levee, Midwest
Here we see a levee broken in the 1993 Midwest floods. Until decisions are made about
rebuilding the levees, property owners cannot make informed decisions about
damaged buildings.

An important policy question at this point is, "Is public money
better spent relocating vulnerable uses out of the floodplain or reconstructing levees or
other flood protection works?"  In some cases, you may need to defer decisions about
buildings until the fate of flood protection structures is decided.
Slide I3. Options for flood-damaged buildings
This slide lists the policy options a community has when faced with flood-damaged
buildings. Buildings may be removed  from the floodplain, that is, demolished or
physically relocated; repaired  with or without additional flood protection such as
elevation or floodproofing; rebuilt  on the same site meeting standards in the current
building code and floodplain management ordinance. The choices depend on the
amount of damage, the location of the building, and the preferences of the community
and building owners.
Slide I4. Building in the floodway, Old Woman's Bend, Michigan
This shows a building in Old Woman's Bend, Michigan constructed in the floodway. It
was severely damaged in a flood in 1986. Building owners often want to repair and
reoccupy such buildings; however, under minimum local floodplain management
regulations, buildings that cause an increase in flood elevations may not be constructed
in the floodway. This floodway building is an obvious candidate for removal.
Slide I5. House being moved
This house is being moved to a new location outside the floodplain. Removal or
elevation are the two options for houses damaged more than 50%. It may be less
expensive to move a building than to elevate it or try to control the source of flooding.
Slide  I6. Elevated houses in Guerneville, California on the Russian River
The other option for severely damaged houses is elevating them so that the living areas
are at or above the 100-year flood level. This shows elevated houses in Guerneville,
California on the Russian River. These houses escaped damaged in the January 1995
flooding, although floodwaters almost reached the elevated living space and access to
the houses was cut off during the flooding.
Slide I7. Floodproofed restaurant
Owners of commercial buildings have the option to floodproof rather than elevate their
buildings in the 100-year floodplain. Floodproofing can take many forms.

This shows
a restaurant in the Midwest protected from flooding by a flood wall. The flood has cut
off its access, but the building remains undamaged.
Slide I8. Wet floodproofed building in Morgan City, Louisiana
This shows a "wet" floodproofed commercial structure in Morgan City, Louisiana. The
building is designed to let floodwaters inside, but you can see the electrical panels and
office are raised above the flood level. Although located in the 100-year floodplain,
buildings like this should have less damage than unprotected buildings.
Slide I9. Pre-FIRM building with less than 50% damage
This pre-FIRM building in Illinois was damaged less than 50% of its value in the 1987
Midwest floods. Under minimum floodplain management regulations, this building
may be repaired to its pre-flood condition without elevation or floodproofing.
Buildings like this pose difficult policy questions. Approximately 40% of flood
insurance claims are for properties which have received payments in previous floods.
Pre-FIRM buildings can receive 20-30% damage over and over. Their owners can still
buy flood insurance and are not required to increase the buildings' flood resistance.
Local governments must decide when enough is enough. They can adopt regulations
more stringent than mandated by FEMA to require the removal, elevation, or
floodproofing of moderately-damaged, pre-FIRM structures in the 100-year floodplain.
Slide I10. Flood-damaged historic building, Keithsburg, Illinois
Historic buildings need special consideration. This historic building in Keithsburg,
Illinois was severely damaged in the 1993 Midwest floods. It cannot be removed or
altered without review by the State Historic Preservation Officer (known as the
SHipPO). The historic integrity of such buildings should be preserved as they are
being repaired or brought up to code. Local policy is important in determining what
buildings are considered historic and how they can be modified to increase resistance
to flood damage.
Slide I11. Now begin Task I.
Now turn to the instruction page for Task I. You will also find a table in Handout I for
recording your policy decisions about flood-damaged buildings.

You have 40 minutes
to complete the task.
Reminder to Facilitator:  Be sure to set the timer for 40 minutes.
INSTRUCTIONS -- TASK I. POLICIES FOR DAMAGED BUILDINGS
(Time to complete the task:  40 minutes)
Purpose
Apply or revise provisions in your floodplain management ordinance to determine the
fate of flood-damaged buildings.
Materials
oBase map with information from Tasks A-H
oFloodplain management ordinance
oHandout I. Policies for Damaged Buildings
Steps
1.On the base map, outline areas where you would consider a temporary moratorium
on repairs and rebuilding pending damage assessment of individual structures and
decisions about the repair or replacement of flood control structures ( black ).
2.In Column 1 of Handout I. Policies for Damaged Buildings , enter brief summaries of
your current policies as contained in the floodplain management ordinance and any
other relevant plans or ordinances as they pertain to decisions about flood-damaged
structures in the floodway, the 100-year floodplain, and outside the floodplain.
Also note existing policies pertaining to the repair or demolition of flood-damaged
historic buildings regardless of location.
3.Next, review your current policies and identify any changes you would make to
guide repairs, demolitions and rebuilding after this flood. Record your changes in
Column 2 of Handout I.
4.On the base map, identify damaged buildings to be removed with a black "X" .
These should include most buildings in the floodway and at least 1/3 of the
buildings in the 100-year floodplain with more than 50% damage.
5.Are there  changes in your existing policies and regulations that could be made now
to improve decisions about damaged buildings after the real flood? On Handout 4.
Recommended Actions, list actions that might be taken now to make this task easier
after a flood.
Products
oBase map showing moratorium areas and buildings to be removed
oHandout I. Policies for Damaged Buildings
oEntries on Handout 4.

Recommended Actions
Instructions -- Task I
Handout I
POLICIES FOR DAMAGED BUILDINGS
Damaged Buildings Local Floodplain Management
RegulationsYour Policy Recommendations
In Floodway
100-year Floodplain
50% or More
Damage
100-year Floodplain
Less than 50%
Damage
Outside 100-year
Floodplain
Historic
Handout I
SCRIPT -- TASK J. PERMIT PROCESSING
(You have 5 minutes to read the script.)
Slide J1. Task J. Permit Processing
Task J is to estimate work load and staff needs to process permits for repair and
rebuilding after the flood and recommend procedures for handling the work load.
After a flood, the number of applications for building permits is many times the usual
volume. You may face pressures to compromise standards and cut short your review
to speed the permitting process. Yet, the safety of the rebuilt community depends on
maintaining good building practices and competent review of permit applications.
Slide J2. Plan checking at counter, Santa Clara County, California
Here is a property owner applying for a building permit in Santa Clara County,
California to repair her flood-damaged building. Local governments find that they
usually need extra staff to help process the heavy volume of permit applications. Some
jurisdictions have hired consultants to supplement their staffs or hired temporary
employees.
Slide J3. Permit processing on the scene, Guerneville, California
Usually some changes in procedures are needed after a flood. The building
department in Sonoma County, California manned this table in Guerneville after the
1995 flood on the Russian River. Building inspectors interviewed owners of damaged
properties to determine if damaged approached 50% of market value. If not, permits
were issued on the spot. If so, an inspector visited the site and owners were asked to
provide additional information to establish pre-flood market values.
Slide J4. Information center in Hardin, Illinois
After the 1993 Midwest floods, the city of Hardin, Illinois set up a center where owners
could find out the elevation of their properties. This information was necessary to
design repairs and apply for building permits. Some local governments have tried to
make the process easier for victims by setting up "one-stop" permit centers.

Other
options are to waive public hearings for some types of permits, waive building permit
fees for a period of time, and increase staffing to improve turnaround time.
Slide J5. Booklet on protecting homes from flooding
Local governments can speed recovery by providing information on techniques for
elevating and floodproofing structures. For example, this FEMA booklet on retrofitting
houses to reduce flood damage can be offered to those seeking permits to repair flood-
damaged houses.
Slide J6. Now begin Task J.
Please turn to the instructions for Task J. You have 15 minutes to complete this task.
Reminder to Facilitator:  Be sure to set the timer for 15 minutes.
INSTRUCTIONS -- TASK J. PERMIT PROCESSING
(Time to complete the task:  15 minutes)
Purpose
Review your organization and procedures to handle plan checks, building permits, and
building inspections for repairs and rebuilding.
Materials
oHandout F. Damage Assessment and Handout I. Policies for Damaged Buildings
oBase map with information from Tasks A-I
oExisting plan check and building permit processing procedures
Steps
1.Based on your estimates of the number of damaged buildings  (Handout F)  and
policies for damaged buildings (Handout I) , estimate the number of building permit
applications you expect for repairs and rebuilding. Enter your estimate below.
Number of Building Permit Applications: ________
2.From Step 1 above and your knowledge of the permit process, estimate the number
of plan checkers, building inspectors and other staff needed to handle the work
load. Enter your estimate below and discuss how you will obtain the help needed.
Plan Checkers: ______ Building Inspectors : _______ Other: ______
3.List below any changes in procedures that you think will be needed after a flood:
_____ ______________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________
4.What problems do you anti cipate in processing permits for repairs? On Handout 4.
Recommended Actions,  list actions that the community might take now to prepare for
the work load.
Products
oEstimates of work load and staffing needs
oRecommended changes in permit processing pr ocedures
oEntries on Handout 4. Recommended Actions
Instructions -- Task J
SCRIPT -- TASK K.

RECONSTRUCTION PLANNING
(15 minutes to read the script)
Slide K1. Task K. Reconstruction Planning
In Task K, you will use all the information you have developed so far to prepare a
reconstruction plan for the flooded areas. This task marks the beginning of a planning
and rebuilding process that will dominate staff and political time for several years to
come. In the previous tasks we explored in increasing detail the damage caused by
your flood and the fate of individual buildings. Now we stand back and take a broader
perspective. The question you will be asking during this task is: "What are the best
uses of the floodplain in our community?"
Slide K2. Thebes, Illinois on banks of Mississippi River
In their natural state, floodplains carry floodwaters, provide wetlands and wildlife
habitats, and offer sites for camping, fishing, hiking, and picnicking. People originally
settled on floodplains for access to water, transportation, flat land for easy building,
and fertile agricultural soils. This shows the town of Thebes, Illinois settled on the
banks of the Mississippi River many decades ago.
Slide K3. Downtown Elmira, New York protected by floodwall
When floods came, people in riverside towns usually responded by trying to control
the floodwaters. They built flood levees and floodwalls (like the one shown here
protecting downtown Elmira, New York); they built dams and reservoirs to impound
water upstream for measured release into the stream channel; they lined stream
channels with rocks or concrete to regulate the flow of floodwaters; they diverted
channels. For decades, people living in floodplains have turned to engineered flood
protection systems to alleviate losses caused by periodic flooding.
Slide K4. Floodwall overtopped, Elmira, New York
After several generations of a structural approach to flood hazard reduction, we are
discovering that flood losses are increasing rather than decreasing. This shows water
spilling over the floodwall designed to protect downtown Elmira, New York from
flooding. One reason flood losses are growing is that once a flood control structure is
in place, people seem to believe that the floodplain is now safe, and construction in the
floodplain increases.

Sooner or later, comes a flood larger than the structure was
designed to contain.
Slide K5. Planning context for post-flood reconstruction plan
A damaging flood gives you a chance to reconsider land uses in the floodplain. This
diagram shows how post-flood reconstruction planning is linked to typical community
planning. Ideally, a community's comprehensive plan is the umbrella defining land
uses and circulation in the floodplain in relation to the rest of the community. A
comprehensive plan may contain or be supplemented by a floodplain area plan
recommending land uses and development practices in the floodplain to reduce flood
losses. A post-flood reconstruction plan is completed after a damaging flood and
essentially revises the comprehensive community plan and floodplain area plan (if
there is one). The rest of this introduction gives examples of how some cities have
planned and implemented new floodplain uses after major floods.
Slide K6. Downtown buildings on riverfront, Elmira, New York
Elmira, New York is a city of about 40,000 people on the Chemung River in the
"southern tier" of New York state. A main downtown street, aptly named Water Street,
runs next to the river. This pre-1970 slide shows buildings on the south side of Water
Street which are backed up to the river and theoretically protected by the flood wall
just shown. The first floor of the buildings contained stores and the upper floors either
contained offices or were vacant.
Slide K7. Flood in Elmira, New York, 1972
Tropical storm Agnes stalled over the region in June 1972 causing major flooding in the
Chemung River basin. Here you see the buildings on Water Street with water up to
their second stories. A breach in the dike contributed to the flooding.
Slide K8. Sketch of redevelopment plan
After the floodwaters receded, the city decided to pursue redevelopment of the
downtown area with funding from HUD and help from the New York State
Development Corporation. An outlying shopping mall and stagnant economy had
caused a typical decline in downtown retail sales, and the area was in need of help
before the flood. The redevelopment plan, shown here, features a linear riverside
promenade incorporating the flood wall.

The plan also proposes rehabilitation of many
historic buildings, a new four-lane arterial through downtown, closing Main Street to
create a park and pedestrian shopping mall, and other features to address the
economic, transportation, and social needs of the community as well as flood
protection.
Slide K9. Riverfront park along the Chemung River
This shows the riverfront park in downtown Elmira in 1994. The buildings on the river
side of Water Street were removed to open views to the river from the city center and
create this pleasant promenade. Many of the buildings were in poor condition and
under-used before the flood. Viable businesses were relocated elsewhere in
downtown. Federal funds available for recovery allowed the city to undertake a major
redevelopment project that would not have been politically or economically feasible
before the flood. Downtown still serves as the region's business center. Although not
all of the plan was implemented and downtown is still subject to flooding, the
combination of a new upstream dam and removal of floodplain buildings means that
the city is less vulnerable than before.
Slide K10. Flood-damaged house, Rapid City, South Dakota, 1972
Rapid City, South Dakota also endured a flood in 1972. Storms stalled over the Black
Hills dumping up to 10 inches of rain in the Rapid Creek watershed. An earthen dam
above Rapid City was washed out and a wall of water descended on the city killing 238
people and destroying 770 houses and 565 mobilehomes. This shows one of the
destroyed houses.
Slide K11. House knocked from foundation, Rapid City, 1972
This house was knocked off its foundation and tipped into its basement.
Slide K12. Owners teeing off on former home site, Rapid City, 1992
This is the same location 20 years later. The property is now part of a golf course and
the former homeowners are teeing off where their house used to stand.
Slide K13. Green belt in Rapid Creek floodplain, 1992
The golf course is part of a green belt running the length of Rapid City along the creek.
In addition to the golf course, the green belt contains hiking trails, a bike path and
facilities for picnicking, soccer, polo, ice skating, horseshoes, and volleyball.

With an
infusion of funds from several federal agencies during an election year, Rapid City was
able to acquire and transform its floodplain lands. Rapid City is safer from floods,
more beautiful, and much better supplied with recreational facilities than before the
devastating flood.
Slide K14. Flood damage in Estes Park, Colorado, 1982
Ten years after the Rapid City flood, Estes Park, Colorado got its turn. This shows
damage from the 1982 flood which struck this tourist town at the entrance to Rocky
Mountain National Park. A dam above the town failed sending a wall of water down
Fall River into town.
Slide K15. Clean up in Estes Park
Clean up began almost immediately. The flood arrived just 3 days into the 3-month
long summer tourist season which produces 95% of the annual income for town
businesses. So, the town leaders were very anxious to get back in business quickly.
Slide K16. Redevelopment plan, Estes Park
After the town was cleaned up and most businesses operating, the townspeople set
about planning for reuse of part of the floodplain. This shows a plan for a riverside
park in an area occupied by a gas station, army surplus store and a motel before the
flood. The plan was adopted about 18 months after the flood.
Slide K17. Riverside park, Estes Park
This shows the finished riverside park during spring runoff. The park, complete with a
walkway, now extends along Fall River through Estes Park.
Slide K18. Redevelopment sign, Estes Park
In addition to the new park, which decreases the town's vulnerability to flood damage,
Estes Park took the opportunity to strengthen its sign code, add new sidewalks,
benches and street lights. The result is a more attractive central business district which
is friendlier to tourists and pedestrians. The district is also a financial success. In 1995,
the town's director of public works delivered a paper entitled, "Estes Park:  From
Destruction to Economic Success."
Slide K19. Soldiers Grove, Wisconsin before the flood
Repeated flooding on the Kickapoo River led to an Army Corps of Engineers proposal
in 1970 for a $3.5 million levee to protect $1 million in floodplain property in Soldiers
Grove, Wisconsin.

The town's share of the cost was estimated at $220,000 for
construction plus a $10,000 annual maintenance fee. With an annual budget of about
$14,000 a year, the village could not come up with the local share. Repeated flooding
had left the business district in a state of blight and, between 1975 and 1978, village
leaders embarked on a plan to relocate the downtown district to higher ground. They
hired an architect to plan a new business district and purchased a farm field on the
edge of town as a site; however, federal funds to finance the relocation were not
approved.
Slide K20. 1978 flood at Soldiers Grove
Then, in 1978, a flood struck destroying much of the business district. Because the
community was unified behind its plan and ready for action, within week of the flood,
HUD awarded Soldiers Grove $1 million to start the relocation.
Slide K21. Construction at new downtown site, Soldiers Grove
Here you see construction underway at the new downtown site. The old site is in the
background. The village also received funds to move its water well out of the
floodplain and to reroute roads to provide emergency access around the river in times
of flooding.
Slide K22. New Soldiers Grove business district
This shows the new business district. The project was completed in 1983 at a total cost
of $6.6 million. The new buildings are constructed for energy efficiency and
landscaping is designed to blunt the force of winter winds. By local ordinance, all new
commercial buildings must receive at least half their heat from solar power. The new
district is more energy efficient, attractive, barrier-free, and successful than the old one.
Slide K23. Park along the Kickapoo River at Soldiers Grove
And, here is the previous business district site, now developed as the Beauford T.
Anderson Memorial Park with a war memorial and recreational facilities as shown
here. Like other successful reconstruction planning programs, post-flood
reconstruction in Soldiers Grove meets many community objectives in addition to
flood-hazard reduction.
Slide K24.

Suggestions for reconstruction planning
This slide summarizes a few suggestions from these examples to keep in mind as you
start working on plans for rebuilding in your floodplain.
oIdentify beneficial uses of the floodplain .
oBe sure new and repaired buildings are safer from flood damage.
oAvoid grandiose plans. Rebuilding plans should address only the specific needs of
rebuilding.
oCapitalize on achievable opportunities. These will be specific and clearly related to
the flood damage.
oUse redevelopment powers. Most rebuilding plans are redevelopment plans using
tax increments to help finance public improvements.
oUnderstand and accept economic realities. Floods change the economics of doing
business. It is rarely possible to simply restore things exactly as they were.
oWork closely with private sector. Remember that local governments plan, but the
private sector will do most of the rebuilding.
Slide K25. Now begin Task K.
With that as background to stimulate thinking, you are ready to create your own plans
for _______________________. Please turn to the instructions for Task K and Handout K.
The handout is a table to help you identify opportunities for land use change. You
have about an hour to identify opportunities and create a reconstruction plan for your
community's floodplain.
Reminder for Facilitator:  Be sure to set the timer for 60 minutes.
INSTRUCTIONS -- TASK K. RECONSTRUCTION PLANNING
(Time to complete the task:  60 minutes)
Purpose
Identify opportunities for land use change and prepare a reconstruction plan for your
community's 100-year floodplain.
Materials
oBase ma p with information from Tasks A-J
oHandout F. Damage Assessment
oHandout I. Policies for Damaged Buildings
oComprehensive plan, redevelopment plan, other plans, zoning maps
oFloodplain management ordinance
oHandout K. Planning Opportunities
Steps
1.Using the information accumulated on the base map and handouts and your
knowledge of the community and its plans, identify opportunities for changes in
land use and structures in the floodplain that could improve safety from floods and
achieve other community objectives. List the planning opportunities on Handout K.
Planning Opportunities .
2.Draw a proposed reconstruction plan for the floodplain on an overlay of the base
map.

Show land uses, transportation changes, design features and other relevant
information.
3.Estimate how long you think it would take to complete and adopt a reconstruction
plan allowing for public hearings and full citizen participation. How long do you
think it will be before the damaged areas of your community are completely
rebuilt?
Months for floodplain planning: ______  Years for reconstruction: ________
4.What problems did you have in preparing a reconstruction plan? On Handout 4.
Recommended Actions,  list actions that the community might take now to prepare for
this task.
Products
oHandout K. Planning Opportunities
oOverlay of base map showing major features of the reconstruction plan
oEntries on Handout 4. Recommended Actions
Instructions -- Task K
Handout K
PLANNING OPPORTUNITIES
Types of Opportunity Potential Opportunities
Reducing risks from
floods; other hazards
Eliminating non-
conforming uses
Correcting plan/zoning
inconsistency
Realigning or improving
roads
Improving housing
conditions or
affordability
Enhancing the local
economy
Upgrading inadequate
commercial, industrial, or
public facilities
Improving urban design
Providing open space
Preserving historic
buildings
Others (list)
Handout K
SCRIPT -- TASK L. MITIGATING FLOOD HAZARDS
(10 minutes to read the script )
Slide L1. Task L  Mitigating Flood Hazards
Task L explores how recovery can be made easier by reducing the potential for flood
damage in advance of a flood and preparing for recovery tasks. FEMA sets aside an
amount equal to 15% of disaster assistance funds for mitigation projects. To qualify for
the funds, jurisdictions must have a mitigation plan. You will work out the key features
of your mitigation plan in Task L.
Slide L2. Ways to Mitigate Flood Losses
What is mitigation? It basically means taking actions to reduce the long-term
vulnerability to disaster losses. Flood hazard mitigation usually involves one or more
of the "A" actions listed on the slide:  AVERT  the flood, ADAPT  to the flood, AVOID
the flood, and ANTICIPATE  the flood.

Averting the flood includes all types of
structural flood control; adapting to the flood hazard includes elevating and
floodproofing buildings; avoiding the flood hazard means keeping vulnerable land
uses out of areas prone to flooding; and anticipating the flood means preparing for
emergency response, recovery and rebuilding after a flood.
Slide L3. Flood insurance policy
This shows a flood insurance policy issued under the National Flood Insurance
Program. Normally, insurance is not considered mitigation. However, the NFIP has
mitigation built in. Communities must join the program before property owners are
eligible for insurance. To join, communities must adopt a floodplain management
ordinance meeting specific minimum standards. However, the standards are
minimums; nothing precludes a community from adopting more stringent
requirements. In fact, the NFIP rewards property owners in cities that exceed the
minimum standards with lower insurance premiums.
Slide L4. Elevated houses in Snoqualmie, Washington
For example, in the town of Snoqualmie in Washington State, 12 houses were
repeatedly flooded. Damage did not reach 50% of pre-flood value of any of the houses.
So, under the terms of its local floodplain management ordinance, the town did not
require elevation. Finally, after a flood in 1987, the town amended its zoning code to
require elevation of any of the 12 houses which received flood damage exceeding 10%
of market value. Here you see a house in this district being elevated after the flood.
The one behind it has not yet been elevated. Because the 10% standard was adopted as
part of the town's zoning code, the cost of elevation was financed with SBA low-interest
loans.
Slide L5. Greenway along Mingo Creek in Tulsa, Oklahoma
This shows the greenway along Mingo Creek in Tulsa, Oklahoma. Tulsa used to have
the worst record of any community in the flood insurance program. Property along
Mingo Creek had been flooded in 9 out of 15 years. Finally, the city began to relocate
buildings out of the 100-year floodplain, creating this greenway. The city also adopted
new floodplain management regulations substantially exceeding the NFIP minimum
requirements and now Tulsa property owners have the lowest flood insurance
premiums in the nation--25% lower than its prior rates.
Slide L6.

Boulder Creek, Boulder, Colorado
To the extent that the reconstruction plan you just completed reduces the potential for
future flooding, it is a plan for mitigation. One point of this task is that you do not
need to wait for a flood to plan and carry out mitigation actions. This shows Boulder
Creek winding its way through the City of Boulder, Colorado. The last serious
flooding on the creek was Memorial Day 1894--100 years ago. However, the flood
potential was documented by the Army Corps of Engineers and a 1977 study
recommended lining the creek channel with concrete to control flooding.
Slide L7. Houses being removed from floodplain, Boulder
Boulder residents fought to keep the creek channel in its natural state and, in 1987, the
council adopted an ordinance prohibiting the issuance of building permits for any
structure with sleeping quarters in the high-hazard zone along Boulder Creek. In 1992,
Boulder also initiated a program to purchase and remove buildings in order to reduce
the size of the high-hazard area, particularly at the high school site. This shows a house
being removed.
Slide L8. Soccer field on former house sites, Boulder
This shows a soccer field developed in 1994 on the sites from which the houses were
removed.
Slide L9. Map showing the high-hazard zone before the relocation project, Boulder
The purple areas on this map show the high-hazard zone along Boulder Creek before
the relocation of buildings. The largest building, shown on the right side of the slide, is
the high school.
Slide L10. Map showing the high-hazard zone after the relocation project, Boulder
The purple areas on this map show the high-hazard zone after the buildings were
removed. As you can see, the zone is much smaller than in the previous slide. Note
that the high school building is now out of the high-hazard zone. With the removal of
the buildings, more floodplain is now available for the floodwaters to spread out and
slow down, and the high school building can remain with assurance that students can
safely evacuate the building if flooding occurs.
Slide L11. Boulder Creek bike and walking path
In addition to the relocation project, the city purchased or acquired easements over
creekside property extending for six miles along the creek and five tributaries.

The
centerpiece of this project is bike and pedestrian paths which allow you to walk or
bicycle almost anywhere in Boulder without crossing a street.
Slide L12. Sign announcing Annual Boulder Creek Festival
Every year, the residents of Boulder gather in the creek corridor for the Annual Boulder
Creek Festival on Memorial Day to celebrate the creek and the greenbelt including the
creek path.
Slide L13. Rubber duck race on Boulder Creek
A popular event during the festival is a rubber duck race. People pay $5 to enter a
duck in the race with the proceeds going to provide handicapped access to the creek.
Boulder's creekside project reduces the city's vulnerability to flood losses while at the
same time providing a safe and pleasant alternative to the automobile and a focal point
for community activities.
Slide L14. Wetlands along Charles River in Massachusetts
Protecting the ability of wetlands and marshes to store floodwaters is an important
aspect of flood hazard mitigation. This shows wetlands which are part of an 8,500-acre
preserve along the Charles River in Massachusetts. The Army Corps of Engineers
acquired the land and easements for $10 million. This was far less than the $100
million estimated for upstream dams and levees needed to control an equivalent
amount of floodwater. The Corps report states that "nature has already provided the
least-cost solution to future flooding . . ."
Slide L15. Cluster development in Portola Valley, California
Development practices in watersheds can affect the frequency and height of floods on
rivers and streams. This shows a carefully planned cluster development in Portola
Valley, California featuring generous open space, native vegetation, limitations on
impervious surfaces and other features to reduce runoff from the site.
Slide L16. Drying basement of historic building, Darlington, Wisconsin
Protecting historic buildings and places from flood damage is an important mitigation
task. The historic district in Darlington, Wisconsin was flooded in 1993. This shows an
industrial dehumidifier installed to dry out the wood joists in the basement of an
historic brick building in the district.
Slide L17. Diagram of floodproofing technique useful for historic buildings
To reduce future flood damage, Darlington completed a floodproofing study and
evaluated 38 buildings.

A floodproofing alternative being used in Darlington for
historic buildings is to fill in the basements and elevate the first floor and utilities above
the 100-year flood level as shown in this diagram. From the outside, the historic
character of the buildings is preserved, but they will be far less vulnerable to flood
damage.
Slide L18. Flood emergency response and recovery plans
Most cities have preparedness and response plans that detail the responsibilities of
various city departments in the immediate response to a flood. Some cities, however,
have thought through the requirements of long-term recovery and rebuilding. Here
you see the Post-Flood Recovery Assistance Plan for Arvada, Colorado along with two
more typical response plans. As you have experienced today, many of the recovery
tasks would be more readily done if planned in advance. A part of any flood hazard
mitigation plan should be a statement of actions a city will take before a flood comes to
better handle both emergency response and long-term recovery.
Slide L19. FEMA's E-Net studio
FEMA has established a educational network to convey hazard and recovery
information to local governments and others in need of the information. This shows the
studio in Emmitsburg, Maryland. Efforts like this to educate the public and support
private decisions to reduce flood vulnerability are very important parts of any
mitigation program. Most mitigation will actually be done by private businesses and
individuals. Local governments can help by providing information, incentives, and
sometimes requirements.
Slide L20. Now begin Task L.
This is your last task. Throughout the day you have been listing actions to improve
your ability to handle the recovery tasks in this exercise. During this task, you will
review your recommended actions, assign them priorities and detail the most
important actions. You have 30 minutes to complete this task. Please turn to the
instructions and copies of Handouts L1  and L2.
Reminder to Facilitator:  Be sure to set the timer for 30 minutes.
INSTRUCTIONS -- TASK L. MITIGATING FLOOD HAZARDS
(Time to complete this task:  30 minutes)
Purpose
Identify and describe high-priority actions to include in a flood hazard mitigation plan,
drawing on the entries on Handout 4.

Recommended Actions and major points from
working Tasks A - K.
Materials
obase map with information from Tasks A-K and all handouts
oHandout L1. High-Priority Action to Reduce Flood Risk
oHandout L2. Contacts for Technical and Financial Assistance
Steps
1.Listen to your recorder recap the actions listed on Handout 4. Recommended Actions.
Discuss the actions and make changes in the list as needed. Then, check the actions
you decide are high-priority needs to reduce flood risk or the burdens of recovery.
Be sure to check at least 5 actions.
2.For each checked a ction, fill out a copy of Handout L1. High-Priority Action to Reduce
Flood Risk , indicating who should be responsible for carrying out the action, who
should be involved in the decisions, resources needed and available to accomplish
it, and when it should be started and completed.
3.Seek information from those present at the exercise to fill out Handout L2. Contacts
for Technical and Financial Assistance.
Products
oHandout 4. Recommended Actions with high-priority actions checked
oAt least five cop ies of Handout L1. High-Priority Action to Reduce Flood Risk
oHandout L2. Contacts for Technical and Financial Assistance
Instructions --Task L
Handout L1
HIGH-PRIORITY ACTION TO REDUCE THE RISK OF FLOODING
Description of the Action
Agencies Responsible for Carrying Out the Action
People and Organizations Who Should be Involved in the Decisionmaking
Resources Needed (funds, expertise, equipment, etc.,)
Possible Sources for Resources
Time to Start_____________________________________
Time to Complete _________________________________
Handout L1
Handout L2.
CONTACTS FOR TECHNICAL AND FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
The true measure of effectiveness of the Flood Recovery Exercise, which you have just
completed, will be in the actions that your community now takes. Throughout the day, you
have identified potential problems that your community is likely to face following a flood.

You
have also identified a series of high-priority actions that will lessen the impact of those
problems, if you pursue them prior to the next flood.
FEMA, your state emergency management agency, and your state floodplain management
officials stand ready to help you carry out these actions. Below is a list of agencies to contact
for technical and financial assistance to help your community meet its flood-hazard reduction
goals. Add the appropriate names and telephone numbers to the list with the help of those
present at the exercise. Then, keep this page with your copies of Handout L1. You are now
ready to begin implementing the actions!
FEMA REGIONAL OFFICE  (location: ___________________________________________)
Telephone Number: _______________________________________________________
Hazard Mitigation Officer : _____________________________________________________
Telephone Number: _______________________________________________________
STATE EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY
Telephone: ___________________________________________________________________
State Hazard Mitigation Officer:  ________________________________________________
Telephone Number: _______________________________________________________
STATE FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT AGENCY
Telephone Number: ___________________________________________________________
State Floodplain Manager: _____________________________________________________
Telephone Number: _______________________________________________________
Floodplain Management Resource Center --A Service of the Association of State Floodplain
Managers, University of Colorado. Telephone:  303-492-6818.
Handout L2
Slide Index
A complete listing of slides used in the exercise follows. The text slides were prepared
by DAE Corporation based on text provided by Martha Tyler, Spangle Associates.
Other sources are noted with numbers in parentheses and full citations are given at the
end of this section.
Introduction
1. Flood Mitigation and Recovery--An Interactive Exercise for Local Governments
2. Exercise tasks
3. Exercise schedule
4. Exercise purpose
5. Topics  not covered
6. Flood recovery timeline
7. Task structure
8. What players need
9. Getting started
Task A. Flood Warning and Evacuation
A1. Task A. Warning and Evacuation
A2. Woman with child watching storm clouds (5)
A3. National Weather Service office ( 1)
A4. Form for an official flood warning (1)
A5 Flood warning siren (1)
A6. Cross section of floodplain (4)
A7.

Terms for flood frequency (2)
A8. Flood insurance map showing A, B, and C zones (2)
A9. Evacuating people, Elmira, New York (6)
A10. Flood-dama ged vehicles (1)
A11. Sandbagging in downtown Salt Lake City (1)
A12. Moving furniture from a house (5)
A13. Now begin Task A.
Task B. Emergency Shelter
B1. Task B. Emergency Shelter
B2. Red Cross disaster services center tent (12)
B3. Emergency shelter,  Santa Cruz, California (13)
B4. People entering emergency shelter in Elmira, New York (6)
B5. RV in front yard (1)
B6. Now begin Task B.
Slide Index, page 2Task C. Damage Scenario
C1. Task C. Damage Scenario
C2. Rivers converging at Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania (2)
C3. Same  scene with rivers flooding (2)
C4. Chemung River flooding in Elmira, New York (9)
C5. Flash flood in Buffalo Creek, West Virginia (2)
C6. Failed dam in Rocky Mountain National Park (1)
C7. Floodwater channel in mountainside, Rocky Mountain National Park ( 1)
C8. Ice-covered river at Oil City, Pennsylvania (2)
C9. House damaged by ice in Peoria, Illinois (5)
C10. Alluvial fan adjacent to Colorado River (14)
C11. Factors contributing to flood damage
C12. Debris in floodwaters, West Virginia (2)
C13. Broken fl oodgate, Folsom Dam (15)
C14. New houses behind a dike along the Sacramento River (16)
C15. Watershed development, Laguna Beach, California (3)
C16. Structures in the floodway, Guerneville, California (3)
C17. Pre-FIRM building (2)
C18. Elevated houses in floodplain (5)
C19. Damaged mobilehome in Estes Park, Colorado (1)
C20. Scenic river road in northern California (3)
C21. Submerged bridge (2)
C22.

Sewage treatment plant during flood (5)
C23. Water pumping station in Hull, Illinois (4)
C24. Unlabeled drum  on Mississippi River (10)
C25. Now begin Task C.
Task D. Rerouting Traffic
D1. Task D. Rerouting Traffic
D2. Washed-out bridge in Puerto Rico (1)
D3. Traffic control at washed-out road (2)
D4. Map of emergency traffic routes, Salt Lake City (1)
D5. Detour graded around washed-out road (1)
D6. Temporary "Bailey" bridge (17)
D7. Railroad cars used as temporary bridge (1)
D8. Boat used for access (2)
D9. Now begin Task D.
Task E. Restoring Services
E1. Task E. Restoring Services
E2. Severed utility lines  to house in Farmington, Utah (1)
E3. Flooded electric power substation, Keithsburg, Illinois (4)
E4. Temporary above-ground water connection in Inverness, California (3)
E5. Damaged city hall/EOC, Hull, Illinois (4)
E6. Sandbagged school (4)
E7. Now begin  Task E.
Slide Index, page 3Task F. Damage Assessment
F1. Task F. Damage Assessment
F2. Helicopter used to assess damage, Thistle, Utah (1)
F3. Building with red tag in Albany, Georgia (2)
F4. Classifying flood damage to buildings
F5. Houses flooded in Thistle, Utah (1)
F6. Building in 100-year floodplain (2)
F7. Building with more than 50% damage (2)
F8. Categories for percent damage
F9. Flood-damaged historic building (4)
F10. FEMA GPS system for damage assessment (18)
F11. Now begin Task F.
Task G. Temporary Business Locations
G1. Task G. Temporary Business Locations
G2. Flooded retail street in Georgia (4)
G3. Flooded businesses along the Russian River, Guerneville, California (3)
G4.

Businesses operating from trailer in Guerneville, California (3)
G5. Flood sale in Guerneville, California (3)
G6. Portable janitor in Montpelier, Vermont (4)
G7. Napa Auto Parts, Guerneville, California (3)
G8. Criteria for temporary business locations
G9. Now begin Task G.
Task H. Temporary Housing
H1. Task H. Temporary Housing
H2. Bucket brigade in Utah  (1)
H3. Person bailing out his house (1)
H4. Vacancy sign (3)
H5. People applying for housing assistance at a DAC (3)
H6. FEMA trailers  (4)
H7. Criteria for temporary housing sites
H8. Now begin Task H.
Task I. Policies for Damaged Buildings
I1. Task I. Policies for Damaged Buildings
I2. Broken levee, Midwest (10)
I3. Options for flood-damaged buildings
I4. Building in the floodway, Old Woman's Bend, Michigan (19)
I5. House being moved (4)
I6. Elevated houses in Guerneville, Ca lifornia on the Russian River (3)
I7. Floodproofed restaurant (2)
I8. Wet floodproofed building in Morgan City, Louisiana (2)
I9. Pre-FIRM building with less than 50% damage (5)
I10. Flood-damaged historic building, Keithsburg, Illinois (4)
I11. Now begin Task I.
Slide Index, page 4Task J. Permit Processing
J1. Task J. Permit Processing
J2. Plan checking at counter, Santa Clara County, California (3)
J3. Permit processing on the scene, Guerneville, California (3)
J4. Information center in Hardin, Illinois (4)
J5. Booklet on  protecting homes from flooding (4)
J6. Now begin Task J.
Task K. Reconstruction Planning
K1. Task K. Reconstruction Planning
K2. Thebes, Illinois on banks of Mississippi River (5)
K3. Downtown Elmira protected by floodwall (9)
K4.

Floodwall overtoppe d, Elmira, New York (6)
K5. Planning context for post-flood reconstruction plan
K6. Downtown buildings on riverfront, Elmira, New York (9)
K7. Flood in Elmira, New York, 1972 (6)
K8. Sketch of redevelopment plan  (6)
K9. Riverfront park along Chemung River  (20)
K10. Flood-damaged house, Rapid City, South Dakota, 1972 (8)
K11. House knocked from foundation, Rapid City, 1972 (9)
K12. Owners teeing off on former home site, Rapid City, 1992 (8)
K13. Green belt in Rapid Creek floodplain, 1992 (8)
K14. Flood dama ge in Estes Park, Colorado, 1982 (1)
K15. Clean up in Estes Park (1)
K16. Redevelopment plan, Estes Park (1)
K17. Riverside park, Estes Park (1)
K18. Redevelopment sign, Estes Park (1)
K19. Soldiers Grove, Wisconsin before the flood (7)
K20. 1978 flood at Soldiers Grove (7)
K21. Construction at new downtown site, Soldiers Grove (7)
K22. New Soldiers Grove business district (7)
K23. Park along the Kickapoo River at Soldiers Grove (21)
K24. Suggestions for reconstruction planning
K25. Now begin Task K.
Task L. Mitigating Flood Hazards
L1. Task L. Mitigating Flood Hazards
L2. Ways to Mitigate Flood Losses
L3. Flood insurance policy (5)
L4. Elevated houses in Snoqualmie, Washington (2)
L5. Greenway along Mingo Creek in Tulsa, Oklahoma (22)
L6. Boulder Creek, Boulder, Colorado (1)
L7. Houses being removed from floodplain, Boulder (11)
L8. Soccer field on former house sites, Boulder (11)
L9. Map showing the high-hazard zone before the relocation project, Boulder (1)
L10. Map showing the high-hazard zone after th e relocation project, Boulder (1)
L11.

Boulder Creek bike and walking path (1)
L12. Sign announcing Annual Boulder Creek Festival (1)
Slide Index, page 5L13. Rubber duck race on Boulder Creek (1)
L14 Wetlands along Charles River in Massachusetts (23)
L15. Cluster developmen t in Portola Valley, California (3)
L16. Drying basement of historic building, Darlington, Wisconsin (24)
L17. Diagram of floodproofing technique useful for historic buildings (25)
L18. Flood emergency response and recovery plans (1)
L19. FEMA's E-Net stud io  (1)
L20. Now begin Task L.
Sources
(1) Clancy Philipsborn, The Mitigation Assistance Corporation, Boulder, Colorado
(2) Federal Emergency Management Agency, General Collection, Washington, DC
(3) Spangle Associates, Portola Valley, California
(4) Cliff Oliver, Federal Emergency Management Agency, Washington, DC
(5) Illinois Department of Transportation, Water Resources Division, Chicago, After
the Flood  slide show
(6) Chemung County Historical Society, Elmira, New York
(7) Thomas Hirsch, Madison, Wi sconsin
(8) Dr. Keith T. Johnson, Rapid City, South Dakota
(9) Slides taken by Spangle Associates from photographs in Rebuilding after Agnes
in The Chemung Historical Journal , December 1972, Elmira, New York
(10) Richard M. Gaffney, Water Resources Progra m, Division of Geology and Land
Survey, Missouri Department of Natural Resources
(11) David Love, Love & Associates, Inc., Boulder, Colorado
(12) California Office of Emergency Services, Coastal Region, Earthquake Program
(13) Slide taken by Spangle Asso ciates from a photo in the Santa Cruz Sentinel.
Permission granted for use in this collection.
(14) Terri Miller, Engineering Division, Arizona Department of Water Resources
(15) Rick Roach, photographer for the Vacaville Reporter . Photo used with
permission.
(16) Vince Maggiora, photographer for the San Francisco Chronicle .

Photo used with
permission.
(17) Steve Blair, Water Wilderness Photography, Pacific Grove, California
(18) Geo-Research, Inc., Billings, Montana
(19) Elizabeth Lemersal, Federal  Emergency Management Agency, Washington, DC
(20) Lynda and Philip Carpentier, Elmira, New York
(21) Roddy Dull, Roddy's Signs, Boscobel, Wisconsin
(22) Ann Patton, City of Tulsa, Oklahoma
(23) U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, New England Division Waltham, Ma ssachusetts
(24) Susan Boldt, FEMA Hazard Mitigation Coordinator, Wisconsin Interagency
Disaster Recovery Office, Madison, Wisconsin
(25) Slide taken by The Mitigation Assistance Corporation from original design
drawing developed by Dewberry & Davis, F airfax, Virginia.

