All It Takes Is One 3
Are You Ready? 4
Hurricane Season & Climatology 5
Hurricane Forecasts & Advisories 6
Storm Surge 7
Inland Flooding 9
Rip Currents 10
Winds 11
Tornadoes 12
NOAA Weather Radio 13
Planning & Preparation 14
Taking Care of Pets 16
Emergency Supply Kit 17
Final Checklist 18
After The Storm 19
Generator Safety 20
After the Storm Checklist 21
2024 Names 22
Tracking Charts 23
Additional Resources 25
NWS Mobile/Pensacola Info 26
Contents and Editing: NWS Mobile/PensacolaThe 2024 Atlantic Hurricane Season is upon us,
and with it, the reminder that it’s never too early
to prepare! You and your family can prepare in
many ways like having a plan and ensuring to
implement that plan when a hurricane
threatens the area. Knowing if you live in an
evacuation zone, who your local officials are,
and connecting with your county Emergency
Management Agency are ways you can prepare
today. Calm periods of weather are the perfect
time to assemble an emergency preparedness
kit and discuss with your loved ones what your
emergency plans should include.
It’s important to know where you’re getting
information from during impactful weather like
before, during, and after a tropical system
impacts the area. Be sure to follow trusted
sources like your local National Weather Service
office, county Emergency Management Agency,
and local Broadcast Meteorologists. You can
follow the NWS Mobile/Pensacola office on
social media @NWSMobile and online at
weather.gov/mob. Your local NWS will be here
for you before, during, and after the storm,
providing the latest information!
Did you know that you also play a key role in
helping others prepare? The Gulf Coast hosts
thousands of people every summer as they
come to enjoy our beautiful beaches during
their vacation. You can help us get the message
out by recommending this guide to friends and
family and being the force multiplier in
hurricane preparedness!

This guide will give you
the information you need to learn the hazards
and impacts of tropical systems and what you
can do to prepare for them.
NWS Mobile/Pensacola Tropical Team
one
Whether this year is an active or a slow hurricane season, it only takes one storm to change
your life and the face of your community.
OUR HURRICANE SEASON PLEA - We must be prepared for the TOTAL tropical threat. Consider
ALL of the potential threats from hurricanes to your community and your home, not just the
category of the storm!
The first step in preparing for hurricanes is to know your risk. The more you know, the better
prepared you will be to react accordingly to the potentially life-threatening hurricane threats.
Find out today what hurricane-related hazards can happen where you live.
Remember: Hurricanes are NOT just a coastal problem. Impacts from wind and water can be
felt 100s of miles inland. Significant impacts can occur regardless of storm strength.
During hurricane season, be a HERO and pass
vital information on the weather, shelters, and
evacuation routes to others. YOU could be the
lifeline between loved ones and life-saving
information. Note: Always ensure the
information comes from a reliable source.
In addition to us, make sure to follow your county
and state Emergency Management Agencies and your local tv meteorologists and stations on
social media to stay up-to-date on the latest local forecasts and information during hurricane
season.
HURRICANE SEASON REMINDER - Keep in mind that you won’t always get 5 days to prepare
ahead of a storm. Here’s a look at where all U.S. Landfalling Category 5 Hurricanes were 5 days
before landfall and 3 days before landfall.
5 DAYS BEFORE LANDFALL 3 DAYS BEFORE LANDFALL
AIM TO BE WEATHER READY THIS HURRICANE SEASON. BE PREPARED, NOT SCARED.
quiz
Take this quiz to find out if you’re ready for hurricane season! Be #HurricaneStrong!
YES NO
Have you and your neighbors pooled resources and identified who has
items like a grill, deep freezer, generator, or chainsaw?

You may have a
resource that neighbors may need, so sharing resources in the aftermath of
a storm can help many!
Do you know where you and your family will go if ordered to evacuate?
Do you have emergency plans for your pets? Most shelters do not allow pets
and many animal clinics close if they are in harm’s way.
If you take medicine, do you have a 7-day supply of medications and
prescriptions? Don’t forget about other family members’ prescriptions, too.
Do you have flashlights and extra batteries? You won’t want to run down
your cellphone battery by using its flashlight feature.
Do you have at least a 3-day supply of drinking water and non-perishable
foods available? Allow one gallon of water per person per day.
Will you have cash available during power outages? ATMs will not work
during power outages.
Do you already have plywood or other materials to protect your windows?
Is your insurance policy up-to-date with new valuables or housing
improvements? Consider taking photos or videos of your belongings.
Are your family’s personal records and important documents stored in a
waterproof container?
Do you have a generator? Even a tropical storm can disrupt power to your
home for several days.
How many YESresponses do you have?
9 or more Very good! You are more prepared than most people!
5 to 8 Not too shabby. Look into how you can improve this score.
4 or less Let’s get serious about preparing now! Don’t wait until a storm develops in
the Gulf of Mexico to prepare.
climate
Hurricanes and tropical storms form over warm ocean waters, like those found in the Gulf of
Mexico, typically during the summer and autumn each year.
Hurricane season in the Atlantic basin runs from June 1 through November 30. The Atlantic
basin includes the Atlantic Ocean, the Caribbean Sea, and the Gulf of Mexico. On average, 14
tropical storms and 7 hurricanes develop in the Atlantic basin each hurricane season. The peak
of hurricane season occurs in August and September for our region with most activity
occurring between mid-August and mid-October.
Hurricanes can strike any month during hurricane season.

Sixteen hurricanes have either
directly impacted or produced moderate to major impacts to the interior parts of southeast
Mississippi, southwest and south-central Alabama, and northwest Florida since 1990.
While the greatest damage resulting from landfalling hurricanes or tropical storms is typically
along the coast which is closest to the strongest winds and storm surge; inland areas also
experience destructive winds, tornadoes, and flooding from heavy tropical rains.
ALLHurricanes Within 50 Miles 1900-2022 MAJOR Hurricanes Within 50 Miles 1900-2022
For that reason, everyone along the northern Gulf Coast needs to be prepared during
hurricane season. Be prepared, not scared!
forecast
The National Hurricane Center (NHC) in Miami, FL is the official source for tropical advisories
and forecasts.

NHC is responsible for issuing tropical watches and warnings for the entire
United States.
TROPICAL WATCHES AND WARNINGS
NOTE: Hurricane preparedness activities
become difficult once winds reach tropical
storm force, so watches and warnings are
issued in advance of the onset of tropical
storm force wind (39-73 mph)
Hurricane/Tropical Storm WATCH:
Tropical Storm and/or Hurricane conditions
are POSSIBLE somewhere in the specified area
(typically issued 48 hours in advance of the
onset of tropical storm force winds)
Hurricane/Tropical Storm WARNING:
Tropical Storm and/or Hurricane conditions
are EXPECTED somewhere in the specified
area (typically issued up to 36 hours in
advance of the onset of tropical storm force
winds)
Extreme Wind WARNING (EWW):
Short duration
warning for the
onset of extreme
sustained winds
(115+ mph)
associated with
the eyewall of a
major hurricane
(NOTE: This is
the final call to shelter in place!!)
Storm Surge Watch/Warning:
Possibility/Danger of life-threatening
inundation from rising water moving inland
from the shoreline somewhere within the
specified area, generally within 48/36 hours.COMMON TROPICAL PRODUCTS
•Tropical Weather Outlook
•Public Advisories
•Forecast Discussions
•Hurricane Local Statements
NHC FORECAST REMINDERS
The NHC forecast cone represents the 5-year
average error and the center of the storm will
remain in the white error cone 67% of the time
The forecast cone is NOT a cone of impacts
REMEMBER: Hurricane conditions can be felt
100s of miles from the center of the storm
DO NOT focus solely on the exact forecast
track or the skinny black line
DO NOT wait for a Hurricane Watch or Warning
to be issued for your location before you begin
to implement your initial preparedness
preparations — it may be too late!
surge
Storm surge is the wall of water pushed toward the shoreline as a hurricane moves ashore.
Storm surge is often the greatest threat to life and property from a hurricane along our coast.
Storm surge is highest near and to the right of where the eye of the hurricane crosses the
coast.

The advancing storm surge combines with the normal tide to create what we refer to as
storm tide.
Wind-driven waves on top of storm tide can lead to extreme flooding in coastal areas,
especially during high tide, resulting in storm tides reaching up to 20+ feet in some cases. The
rise in water level can cause significant damage to structures along the immediate coast.
Coastal buildings that survive hurricane-force winds can be severely damaged if their
foundations are undermined or weakened by erosion. Adding to the destructive power of surge,
battering waves may increase damage to buildings directly along the coast.
There are a number of factors that
determine the storm surge for any
location along the coast: forward
speed of the storm, size of the
storm, angle of approach to the
coastline, central pressure of the
storm, coastal feature shape, and
coastal feature characteristics,
such as bays and estuaries.
In general, the more intense a hurricane and the closer a
community is to the center or right quadrant of a
hurricane, the more destructive the storm surge.
Those living on or near the coast should know the
evacuation zone for their residence. When local officials
declare an evacuation for your zone, move to the
nearest possible evacuation destination outside of the
danger zone.
When officials say it is time to evacuate…GO! Storm
surge can arrive well ahead of the hurricane due to
long-period swells. Don’t wait until the last minute to
evacuate. Lots can be forgotten if you pack and
evacuate at the last minute, so it is important for you
and your family to figure out these details well ahead of
time. Plan Ahead!
1.Storm surge is often the greatest threat to life and
property from a hurricane. It poses a significant
threat of drowning. Six inches of fast-moving flood
water can knock over an adult.

Two feet of rushing
water to carry away most vehicles, including SUVs.
2.Storm surge can cause water levels to rise quickly
and flood large areas - sometimes in just minutes,
and you could be left with no time to take action if
you have not already evacuated.
3.Storm surge values do not correspond well to the
hurricane wind categories (Saffir-Simpson
Hurricane Wind Scale) that range from 1 to 5.
These categories are based only on wind and do
not account for storm surge.
4.Tropical storms, hurricanes, major hurricanes, and
post-tropical cyclones can ALL cause
life-threatening storm surge.
5.Storm surge can occur with non-tropical storms
like Nor’easters and winter storms.
6.Many areas along the Gulf and East Coast are
vulnerable to storm surge, including areas several
miles inland from the coastline.
7.Storm surge can occur before, during, or after the center of a storm passes through an area.
Storm surge can cut off evacuation routes, so do not delay leaving if an evacuation is
ordered for your area.
8.During the peak of storm surge, emergency responders will likely NOT be able to reach you if
you are in danger.
9.Even if your community is not directly affected by storm surge, it could experience other
hazards from the storm such as impassable roads, water and sewage problems, and power
outages. If power remains on, downed electrical wires can pose an electrocution risk.
10.Weather conditions and the forecast can change. Local officials can issue evacuations for
many different reasons. Always follow the instructions of local officials.
flood
When it comes to hurricanes, wind and storm surge are only part of the story. Heavy rain and
the resulting inland freshwater flooding are equally as dangerous and destructive. There were
271 direct fatalities in the United States from 2017-2021 and freshwater flooding was responsible
for 65% of those direct fatalities.
Heavy rain is not directly related to the intensity of a
tropical storm or hurricane. Some of the highest rain totals
occurred during weaker storms that slowly drifted or
stalled over an area for hours or days.
Slow-moving tropical storms and hurricanes can produce
tremendous amounts of rain in a short period of time.

This
often results in disastrous flooding, which can be a major
threat to communities hundreds of miles inland from the
coastline.
PRACTICAL WAYS TO PROTECT YOURSELF FROM FLOODING:
•Buy Flood Insurance - A Plan for Replaceable Items
•Flood damage is NOT typically covered by homeowner’s
insurance
•Protect Your Personal Documents and Special Items
•Store valuables in plastic tubs with locking tops
•You need to be able to secure and move ALL your valuables
within 15 minutes in case of a last-minute evacuation
•Minimize Flood Damage By “Flood Proofing” Your Home
•Know how to shut off the main circuit breaker to eliminate the
threat of electrocution
•Raise outside air conditioning units onto platforms
•Store rarely used/expensive items in the attic or on high shelves
•Develop a Flood Emergency Plan
•Determine if you live in a flood zone
•Have an evacuation plan with alternate routes
•Communicate the plan with family and friends
•If Advised to Evacuate, Do So IMMEDIATELY
•Stay up-to-date on local road conditions
•Move to a safe location before access is cut off by floodwaters
•Never Drive Across Flooded Roads Or Around Barricades!
•Do not attempt to cross flowing water on foot or in a vehicle
•Never drive through the water if you cannot see the road or
road markers as it may be washed away
•Abandon the vehicle and seek higher ground if caught in rising water
Rip current
Rip currents are powerful, narrow channels of water flowing
away from the beach. Think of a rip current like this - it is a
natural treadmill traveling away from the beach. A rip
current is dangerous because it can sweep even the
strongest swimmers out to sea. For that reason, rip currents
are life-threatening to anyone entering the surf.

While rip
currents can form at any time, they are likely to be present in
the high winds and rough seas that accompany tropical
storms and hurricanes.
BEACHGOERS SHOULD STAY OUT OF THE WATER WHEN A
STORM IS APPROACHING.
A tropical storm or hurricane does not have to directly affect
our area for rip currents to develop along our coastline.
Anytime a tropical system is in the Gulf of Mexico, large swells and higher-than-normal tides
can produce dangerous rip currents along the beaches. As a result, beachgoers are at risk of
getting caught in a rip current even if the skies are clear and it is a beautiful beach day.
IF CAUGHT IN A RIP CURRENT:
•Stay calm; don’t fight the rip current
•Swim parallel to the beach to escape the rip current
•If you can not escape, flip on your back and float
•Wave and yell for help
Both Florida and Alabama use the 5 flag system to alert beachgoers of surf conditions. Flags
are posted at all public beaches where surf conditions and rip currents are monitored
throughout the day. RED FLAGS mean conditions are life-threatening to anyone entering the
surf. In some locations, it is illegal to enter the water when DOUBLE RED FLAGS are being flown.
wind
Hurricane-force winds of 74 mph or greater can destroy buildings, mobile homes, power lines,
and trees. Debris such as signs, roofing material, and siding, as well as small items left outside,
become dangerous flying missiles during a hurricane.
The winds associated with a hurricane are
most intense near the center of the storm,
in a region called the eyewall. As a
hurricane moves inland, the strong winds in
the eyewall begin to decrease, but
hurricane-force winds can still be felt 150+
miles inland from the coast.
GENERAL RULE-OF-THUMB: The faster the
hurricane is moving, the further inland the hurricane-force winds will be experienced.

Don’t let
your guard down simply because you don’t live in a coastal county!
Atlantic hurricanes are classified into 5 categories
according to the Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Wind Scale,
which estimates potential property damage
according to the hurricane’s sustained wind speed.
Keep in mind that the category of the hurricane does
not tell the whole story and does not take into account
any other hazards associated with the hurricane such
as the potential for storm surge, flooding, tornadoes,
or rip currents. We must be prepared for the TOTAL
tropical threat.
To minimize damage from the wind, it is critical to ensure that your home is well constructed.
MOBILE HOME RESIDENTS MUST EVACUATE! Mobile homes, manufactured homes, RVs, campers,
and tiny homes do NOT provide a safe shelter from hurricane- force winds. Straps and other
tie-downs will not protect a mobile or manufactured home from high winds associated with a
hurricane. Residents who live in these types of homes must evacuate when told to do so by
local authorities.
When making landfall, there is always some uncertainty in the exact intensity and landfall
location of the storm. It is important to weigh this uncertainty against the potential risks to
yourself and your family. It is common practice for emergency managers and local officials to
add a buffer or safety margin to their plans - oftentimes planning for a storm that makes
landfall one category higher than forecast. This is a necessary precaution to reduce the risk of
loss of life and minimize the potential impact of the storm. It is essential to incorporate a buffer
or safety margin into your hurricane season preparations!
tornado
Hurricanes and tropical storms can produce tornadoes! Tropical tornadoes are oftentimes
embedded in thunderstorms that are located in the outer rainbands of the storm, usually away
from the center of the storm.
Tropical tornadoes are most likely to occur in the right-front
quadrant of a storm as this area generally has the best
combination of wind shear and instability.
Nearly 70% of landfalling hurricanes produce at least one
tornado and some even spawn tornado outbreaks.

In 2004,
Hurricane Ivan, which made landfall along the Alabama Gulf
Coast, spawned 117 tornadoes over a 3-day period!
While tornado outbreaks are less common in hurricanes and
tropical storms, it is important to recognize that tornadoes
are possible once the outer rainbands of a storm begin to
move onshore. Note that tropical tornadoes are not just a
coastal problem as they can impact communities 100s of
miles inland. Tropical tornadoes can catch people off-guard
as the movement of these tornadoes is oftentimes in a
direction different from supercell tornadoes - tropical
tornadoes move with the outer rainbands, which means the
movement is sometimes to the north or northeast in our area.
Tropical tornadoes are typically weak (EF0-EF1) and short-lived. Tropical tornadoes are
typically less intense than tornadoes produced by supercell thunderstorms during severe
weather season, but when added to the larger area of hurricane-force winds, these tropical
tornadoes can still produce substantial damage and potentially be deadly.
After Tropical Storm Claudette in June of 2021,
NWS survey teams found tornado damage
consistent with a 22+ mile long EF-2 tornado
that greatly impacted the East Brewton
community in Escambia County, AL, and
points northward into Conecuh County, AL.
TORNADO SAFETY TIPS: Put shoes on when
taking shelter, so you don’t walk on debris in
bare feet if your home is hit. Use a helmet to
protect your head. Go to the lowest floor of a
building. Get under a sturdy table or a
stairwell. Cover up with blankets and pillows.
nwr
NOAA Weather Radio All Hazards (NWR) is the official voice of the National
Weather Service. NWR provides continuously updated weather information,
24 hours a day, 365 days a year. Watches, warnings, advisories, forecasts,
current conditions, and climate data are broadcast in 3-5 minute cycles.
A special radio capable of receiving signals in the Very High Frequency (VHF)
public service radio band is required to listen to NWR broadcasts. 7 frequencies from 162.400 to
162.550 MHz are used.

Weather radios can be purchased at most electronics stores and online.
Prices of these radios vary and depend on the type of radio.
NOAA Weather Radio is useful at any time but becomes especially important during hazardous
weather. Watches and warnings are given the highest priority with frequent updates. NWS is a
major part of the Emergency Alert System (EAS) that disseminates warning information rapidly
through commercial broadcast outlets. In an emergency, each NWR station will transmit a
warning alarm tone followed by information on the emergency situation. This signal is capable
of activating specially designed receivers by increasing the volume or producing a visual
and/or audible alarm. Not all weather radios have this capability, but all weather radios can
receive emergency broadcasts.
These maps show the locations of NOAA Weather Radio transmitters located in our area.
Transmitters in south Mississippi Transmitters in south Alabama & northwest Florida
SAME CODES:
www.weather.gov/nwr/counties
LOCAL NOAA WEATHER RADIO INFORMATION:
www.weather.gov/mob/nwr
prep
HOME PREPARATION TIPS FOR HURRICANE SEASON
MOBILE HOMES
•Check tie-downs for any rust or breakage
LANDSCAPING
•Trim trees, shrubs, and dead limbs, especially near your home
•Repair or replace broken or damaged fences
•Shredded bark is preferred for landscaping instead of small
gravel or stone bedding
ROOFING
•Inspect your roof for loose tiles, shingles, or debris and
consider replacing old or damaged shingles with new ones
rated for hurricane-force winds
•Check and install hurricane clips to secure roof trusses to
side walls
•Clear clogged rain gutters and downspouts
DOORS
•Reinforce garage doors and tracks or replace with a hurricane-
tested garage door
•Reinforce double entry doors with heavy-duty foot and
head bolts
•Use a security deadbolt with a 1-inch minimum bolt
length
•Doors can be shuttered, but one entry must be left
easily accessible
WINDOWS
•Inspect existing shutters to ensure good condition and/or
install tested or manufactured hurricane shutters
•Alternative: Use⅝inch or greater exterior grade plywood
secured by 2 ½ inch screws or special clips.

Obtain wood
and fasteners; cut wood to size (labeling pieces); pre-drill
holes; place anchors on home
•Store shutters or plywood lying flat to avoid significant
warping when not in use
PROTECTING YOUR BOAT - TIPS FOR BOAT OWNERS
•Check your marina contract for any hurricane
procedures and policies
•Check with your boat manufacturer for the proper way
to secure your boat during a tropical storm or hurricane
•Consider moving arrangements well in advance
•Trailer boats should be removed from the water and
securely stored at least 48 hours before a tropical storm
or hurricane is expected to make landfall
•Purchase the necessary hurricane materials: additional
mooring lines, crew anchors, fenders, fender boards,
chafing gear, and anchors
•Safe storm moorings should consist of good- condition
ropes of sufficient diameter and length with at least 3-4
substantial anchor points
•Do NOT moor parallel to the bank as receding tides
often breach and/or capsize boats in this type of
anchorage
MARINE SAFETY RESOURCES:
www.hurricanes.gov/prepare/marine.php
AUTOMOBILE TIPS
•It is important to have your vehicle serviced regularly
and ensure it is in good working order to ensure it is
ready for use in case you need to evacuate
•Keep a full gas tank in your vehicle (or fully charged) if
an evacuation seems likely
•Make an emergency kit specifically for your vehicle,
including jumper cables, flashlight, cell phone charger,
first aid kit, water, snacks, etc.
VEHICLE PREPAREDNESS TIPS: www.ready.gov/car
pet
You must plan ahead to ensure you can properly care for your pets during a weather
emergency or evacuation. Your plan should include all family members, including pets!
A FEW PLANNING SUGGESTIONS
•TAKE YOUR PET — If you must leave home, take your
pet with you. You are the best person to care for your
pet. Think About It: if the situation is dangerous for
you, then it’s dangerous for your pet.
•WHERE TO TAKE YOUR PET — Know where to take your
pet before you leave.

Find out which motels or hotels
are “pet friendly” or accept pets in an emergency.
Plan to go to a friend or relative’s house who will
allow you to bring your pet.
•CRATE — Before you travel, make sure your pet is
accustomed to being in a crate. Familiar surroundings can help ease anxiety in your pet. Don't
forget to pack their favorite toys and treats to make them feel more comfortable.
•DISASTER KIT —Always pack your pet’s food, medicines, vaccination records, and pet
insurance information. Assemble this into a disaster kit that you can quickly grab.
•PRE-ARRANGEMENTS — If you get stuck away from home, your pet will be better off if you
made pre-arrangements with a neighbor or friend to take care of your pet. This temporary
caretaker needs a list of phone numbers to reach you and instructions to properly care for
your pet. Your instructions should include a signed authorization for veterinary care and
financial limits to the veterinary care.
•BEHAVIOR — Emergencies can cause pets to display unexpected
or uncharacteristic behaviors. Well-behaved pets may become
aggressive and defensive after a major disruption in their lives.
Your pet may not return to its usual behavior for several weeks.
Use caution when releasing your pet after a storm, especially in
unfamiliar surroundings, and ensure your pet cannot escape. Do
not release your pet outside until you know the area is safe. Allow
your pet plenty of time to rest and adapt to new surroundings.

If
possible, provide your pet with familiar toys.
FEMA PET PREPAREDNESS: www.ready.gov/pets
RED CROSS PET PREPAREDNESS:
www.redcross.org/get-help/how-to-prepare-for-emergencies/pet-disaster-preparedness.html
kit
□Water — At least 1 gallon daily per person for
3-7 days
□Food — Enough for at least 3-7 days
•Non-perishable packaged or canned food
and juices
•Food for infants or the elderly
•Snack foods
•Cooking tools, fuel, non-electric can opener
•Paper plates, plastic utensils
□Blankets, Pillows & Bedding, etc.
□Clothing
•Seasonal
•Rain gear
•Sturdy shoes
□First Aid Kit, Medicines, Prescriptions
□Special Items - Items for babies and the
elderly
□Toiletries and Hygiene items
□Moist towelettes, garbage bags and plastic
ties for personal sanitation
□Items for Children
•Toys
•Books
•Games
□Pet Care Items
•Proper identification, immunization records,
medications
•Ample supply of food and water
•Carrier or cage
•Muzzle and leash□NOAA Weather Radio — Battery operated
□Flashlight & Batteries
□Keys
□Vehicle fuel tanks filled
□Tools - Keep a set with you
□Cellphone — Fully charged cellphone with
an extra battery (non-cordless telephone
set)
□Cash ( small bills) — Banks and ATMs
may not be available for extended
periods
□Credit Cards
□Important Documents - Place these
documents in a waterproof container or
watertight resealable plastic bag
•Insurance
•Medical records
•Bank account numbers
•Social Security card
checklist
ACTIONS TO TAKE WHEN A STORM IS IN THE GULF OF MEXICO
□Listen to radio,

TV and a NOAA Weather Radio for forecasts of the storm’s progress
□Double-check the items in your emergency supply kit and ensure nothing has expired
□Fuel/charge and service your vehicles as gas stations may close early or run out of gas
□Inspect and secure tie-downs for a mobile or manufactured home
□Make sure to have supplies to survive for at least 72 hours, preferably up to one week
□Board up windows (if no shutters), but do not use tape as it provides no protection
□Store lawn furniture and loose, lightweight objects like garbage cans, plants, tools
□Get plenty of extra cash in case the power goes out as ATMs will not work
□Store vehicles that are not being used
□Follow instructions issued by local officials and EVACUATE IMMEDIATELY IF ORDERED
FINAL ACTIONS TO TAKE (IF LEAVING)
□Turn off propane tanks
□Unplug small appliances and turn the refrigerator/freezer to the coldest setting
□Turn off utilities (water/gas/electricity) if ordered
□Notify family members and close friends of your evacuation plans and route
□Lower the water level in the swimming pool by one foot
□Lock your home securely
□Board the doors and brace the garage door
□Take your pets with you
FINAL ACTIONS TO TAKE (IF STAYING)
□Move your vehicle to a safe spot if not using it to evacuate
□Close storm shutters
□Turn the refrigerator and freezer to the coldest setting and only open it if necessary
(NOTE: 25 pounds of dry ice keeps a 10-cubic foot freezer below freezing for 3-4 days)
□Follow instructions from local officials and be prepared to turn off utilities if ordered
□Board doors (leaving an emergency exit), brace the garage door, and remain inside, away
from boarded windows
□Take refuge in a pre-determined safe room like an interior closet, bathroom,

or hall
□Beware of the calm wind in the eye of the storm - do not venture outside as the strongest
winds may occur shortly after the eye passes
DO NOT EXPECT EMERGENCY RESPONDERS TO BE OF ANY ASSISTANCE DURING A LANDFALLING HURRICANE!
after
Dangers remain even after the skies turn blue., This is NOT the time to let your guard down.
Emergency responders may be overwhelmed, so it could take hours or days for them to reach
your area. During and after a storm, expect services to be disrupted for an extended amount of
time. Be ready for power and phone service outages, roads blocked by floodwaters and debris,
and water/sewer outages. Phone calls might be difficult, if not impossible, due to the impact on
communication systems. Communicate via text or social media instead.
Listen to local authorities. After a hurricane,
return home only after local authorities
advise it is safe. Wait for the official
ALL-CLEAR before attempting to return and
be prepared to show proof of residence.
DEBRIS CLEAN-UP - Don’t push yourself!
Straining your body can lead to heart
attacks, heat strokes, and other serious
issues. Perform cleanups slowly and take
lots of breaks. Check on your elderly neighbors and other vulnerable people in your community.
Wear appropriate protective gear such as boots, gloves, and safety glasses when it comes to
moving debris in the aftermath of a storm. Do NOT attempt to move structural supports or
large pieces of debris after the storm and BE CAREFUL using heavy-duty tools like chainsaws.
FLOODWATERS - Watch your step! Do not go into a room where water covers the electrical
outlets or where cords are submerged. Floodwaters often hide sharp and dangerous debris like
broken glass and shards of metal.
Hands off! Stay away from electrical utility
equipment to prevent being electrocuted.
See sparks or hear buzzing, crackling,
snapping, or popping noises? Get out! Stay
out of water that may have electricity in it.
Don’t play in the floodwaters - they can
contain chemicals or objects that could
harm you or make you sick.

You never know
what is hidden or floating in the water (debris, gators, snakes, nutria, or even floating fire ants).
Be cautious in areas where the floodwaters have receded. Roads may have weakened and
could collapse under the weight of a vehicle. Never drive through flooded roads, even if you are
seeking supplies or trying to check on someone.
generator
After a hurricane, primary electrical power will likely be off for hours if not days or weeks. During
this time, many people use portable generators to run essential utilities such as lighting, air
conditioning, and refrigerators.
Each year people are injured or killed in incidents related to portable generator use. The
primary hazards to avoid when using a portable generator are carbon monoxide (CO)
poisoning from the engine exhaust, electrical shock or electrocution, and fire.

Always follow the
directions supplied with the generator.
GENERATOR USAGE TIPS FOR WHEN A DISASTER STRIKES:
•NEVER use portable generators indoors (this
includes a garage, basement, carport,
crawlspace, or an enclosed/ partially-enclosed
area (even if it has ventilation)
•Using fans or opening windows/doors does not
prevent the buildup of CO in your home
•Even if you cannot smell exhaust fumes, you
may be exposed to CO
•If you feel sick, dizzy or weak while using a
generator, get fresh air RIGHT AWAY!
Courtesy of Consumer Product Safety Commission
•Place the generator AWAY from windows, doors, vents that allow CO to get indoors
•Keep the generator dry and do not use it in the rain or wet conditions
•Only operate a generator on a dry surface under an open canopy-like structure (such as
under a tarp held up by poles)
•Dry your hands before touching the generator
•Turn the generator off and let it cool down before refueling
•Plug appliances directly into the generator or use a heavy-duty, outdoor-rated extension
cord that is rated at least equal to the sum of the connected appliance loads (the cord must
be free of cuts or tears and plug must have three prongs/grounding pin)
•Never power the house by plugging the generator into a wall outlet (known as “back
feeding”) - this is extremely dangerous as it poses an electrocution risk to utility workers and
neighbors served by the same utility transformer
GENERATOR SAFETY:
www.redcross.org/get-help/how-to-prepare-for-emergencies/types-of-emergencies/power-outage/
safe-generator-use.html
after checklist
IF EVACUATED,

WAIT FOR “ALL CLEAR” FROM LOCAL OFFICIALS BEFORE RETURNING HOME AND
BE PREPARED TO SHOW PROOF OF RESIDENCE.
GENERAL
□Be cautious of structural damage and downed trees and/or power lines - do not move
structural supports or large pieces of debris
□DO NOT run power generators indoors and ensure the exhaust is well ventilated
□DO NOT use open flames indoors
□Restrict driving to emergencies only - road conditions may be unsafe
DEBRIS
□Cities and counties will provide a schedule and instructions for debris pick-up and removal
(NOTE: debris usually cannot be removed from private property)
□Construction materials, vegetative debris, household hazardous waste, and household
appliances need to be placed into separate piles and moved to the curb for pick-up
WATER
□Use bottled, boiled, or treated water until you know that your water supply is safe
□You can use regular, unscented chlorine bleach to treat water for drinking or cleaning
NOTE: Add 1/8 teaspoon of bleach per gallon of clear water (¼ teaspoon of bleach per gallon if
the water is cloudy) and allow water to stand 30 minutes before using
UTILITIES
□Check for gas leaks - DO NOT use a phone or turn on lights in your home and if you smell or
hear gas leaking, leave immediately!,

(Call the gas company from a neighbor’s house)
□Report any visible damage to electrical lines to the power company and turn off the power at
the main breaker if any electrical equipment/circuits were exposed to water
□DO NOT connect a generator to your home’s electrical circuits (NOTE: if a generator is online
when electrical service is restored, it is a major fire hazard)
SEWAGE
□If you suspect water or sewage lines are damaged, do not use plumbing (toilets, sinks) and
contact the water company or a plumber
INTERIOR CLEANUP
□Disinfect and dry interior buildings and inside items to prevent the growth of bacteria, viruses,
mold, and mildew
□Clean walls, floors and countertops with soap and water (NOTE: Disinfect with a solution of 1
cup bleach to 5 gallons of water)
□Wash clothes in hot water, spray unwashable items with disinfectant and air dry, steam clean
carpets,

and throw out items touched by water that can’t be disinfected
names
charts
resources
RESOURCES FROM NWS MOBILE/PENSACOLA
Local Tropical One-Stop-Shop: www.weather.gov/srh/tropical?office=mob
Hurricane Preparedness YouTube Playlist:
www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLZcEBOTgZxbyyj1cA1A5j-CW_4TTQuWWA
Hurricane Preparedness Videos (ASL):
www.youtube.com/watch?v=pmmZXiHXwuM&list=PL34exzZIOEfECIvkbaTtsy36jJw0hQKp7
2023 Evacuation Zone List:
hurricanestrong.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/08/8-28-23-Find-Your-Evacuation-Zone-Final.
pdf
COASTAL ALABAMA — EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCIES
State of Alabama: www.ema.alabama.gov
Mobile County: www.mcema.net
Baldwin County: www.baldwincountyal.gov/EMA
NORTHWEST FLORIDA — EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCIES
State of Florida: www.floridadisaster.org
Escambia County: www.myescambia.com/beready
Santa Rosa County: www.santarosa.fl.gov/emergency
Okaloosa County: www.co.okaloosa.fl.us/ps/emergency-management
SOUTHEAST MISSISSIPPI — EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCIES
State of Mississippi: www.msema.org,

