How to Build a Kit for Emergencies
Release Date:  June 12, 2020
NASHVILLE – What goes into an emergency supplies kit?
Ready.gov  and get a list of what you’ll need if you have to survive for several days
after a disaster.
Being prepared means having your own food, water and other supplies to last for
at least 72 hours. A disaster supplies kit is a collection of basic items your
household may need in the event of an emergency.
Make sure your emergency kit is stocked with the items on the checklist below.
Most of the items are inexpensive and easy to find and any one of them could
save your life. Headed to the store?

Download a printable version  to take with you.
Once you take a look at the basic items consider what unique needs  your family
might have, such as supplies for pets or seniors.
Basic Disaster Supplies Kit
To assemble your kit store items in airtight plastic bags and put your entire
disaster supplies kit in one or two easy-to-carry containers such as plastic bins or
a duffel bag.
A basic emergency supplies kit could include the following recommended items:
Water (one gallon per person per day for at least three days, for drinking and
sanitation)
Food (at least a three-day supply of non-perishable food)
Battery-powered or hand crank radio and a NOAA Weather Radio with tone
alert
Flashlight
First aid kit
Extra batteries
Whistle (to signal for help)
Dust mask (to help filter contaminated air)
Plastic sheeting and duct tape (to shelter in place )
Page 1 of 2
Page printed at fema.gov/press-release/20210318/how-build-kit-emergencies 10/26/2024
Moist towelettes, garbage bags and plastic ties (for personal sanitation)
Manual can opener (for food)
Local maps
Cell phone with chargers and a backup battery
Download the Recommended Supplies List  (PDF)
Additional Emergency Supplies
Currently, the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) recommends people include
additional items in their kits to help prevent the spread of coronavirus or other
viruses and the flu.
Consider adding the following items to your emergency supply kit based on your
individual needs:
Cloth face coverings  (for everyone ages 2 and above), soap, hand sanitizer,
disinfecting wipes to disinfect surfaces
Prescription medications
Non-prescription medications such as pain relievers, anti-diarrhea medication,
antacids or laxatives
Prescription eyeglasses and contact lens solution
Infant formula, bottles, diapers, wipes and diaper rash cream
Pet food and extra water for your pet
Cash or traveler's checks
Important family documents such as copies of insurance policies, identification
and bank account records saved electronically or in a waterproof,

portable
container
Sleeping bag or warm blanket for each person
Complete change of clothing appropriate for your climate and sturdy shoes
Fire extinguisher
Matches in a waterproof container
Feminine supplies and personal hygiene items
Mess kits, paper cups, plates, paper towels and plastic utensils
Paper and pencil
Books, games, puzzles or other activities for children
###
FEMA’s mission is helping people before, during, and after disasters.
Page 2 of 2
Page printed at fema.gov/press-release/20210318/how-build-kit-emergencies 10/26/2024,

