Hurricane season is the time of year when the tropical ocean waters warm
and the atmospheric winds moisten. It is during this period that the eastern
seaboard and gulf coast communities of the United States hope for a quiet
season while governmental agencies prepare for the worst. Unlike natural di-
sasters such as earthquakes and wildﬁres, the destructive paths of hurricanes
can be predicted to some degree. Preparedness and adherence to recommen-
ded evacuation orders can and do save lives. Like other disasters, however,
nature is an unpredictable force that can result in signiﬁcant destruction,
injury, and loss of life [1]. Systems at multiple levels, not the least of which
is medical, may be stressed and must execute well-designed and practiced
plans to function optimally. Plans are built on experience and on what to ex-
pect. For medical systems, these plans include the prehospital emergency
medical systems, hospitals, and individual physicians. Although medical
needs can vary as much as the strength of the storm, similarities exist across
all windstorms. Knowledge of and preparation for these needs are what build
eﬀective plans.
* Corresponding author.

Division of Trauma, Burns, and Surgical Critical Care,
Department of Surgery, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, PO Box 016960
(D-40), Miami, FL 33101.
E-mail address: dshatz@miami.edu (D.V. Shatz).
0039-6109/06/$ - see front matter  2006 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.suc.2006.02.010 surgical.theclinics.com
546 SHATZ et al
What is a hurricane?
A hurricane is a tropical storm with winds that have reached a sustained
speed of 74 miles per hour (mph) or more. Hurricane winds blow in a large
spiral around a relatively calm center known as the ‘‘eye.’’ The eye is gener-
ally 20 to 30 miles wide, and the storm may extend outward 400 miles. As
a hurricane nears land, it can bring torrential rains, high winds, and storm
surges. A single hurricane can last for more than 2 weeks over open waters
and can run a path across the entire length of the eastern seaboard. August
and September are peak months during the hurricane season, which lasts
from June 1 through November 30.
Windstorms are classiﬁed by category based on the speed of the sustained
winds (Saﬃr-Simpson Hurricane Scale). Tropical depressions are organized
systems of clouds and thunderstorms with a deﬁned circulation and maxi -
mum sustained winds of 38 mph or less. A tropical storm is an organized
system of strong thunderstorms with a deﬁned circulation and maximum
sustained winds of 39 to 73 mph. Intense tropical weather systems with
a well-deﬁned circulation and maximum sustained winds of 74 mph or
higher become hurricanes. Hurricanes are called typhoons in the western
Paciﬁc, whereas similar storms in the Indian Ocean are called cyclones.
Although the most destructive hurricanes aﬀecting the United States form
in the Atlantic Ocean, hurricanes can also form in the Gulf of Mexico, the
Indian Ocean, the Caribbean Sea, and the Paciﬁc Ocean.

Hurricane winds
in the Northern Hemisphere circulate in a counterclockwise motion around
the hurricane’s eye, whereas hurricane winds in the Southern Hemisphere cir-
culate clockwise. Natural phenomena that aﬀect a storm include temperature
of the water, the Gulf Stream, and steering wind currents. Powered by heat
from the sea, storms are steered by the easterly trade wind, the temperate
westerlies, and by their own ferocious energy. Around their core, winds
grow with great velocity, generating violent seas. Moving ashore, they sweep
the ocean inward while spawning tornadoes and producing torrential rains
and ﬂoods. In addition to the violent winds, the storm surge, which generates
subsequent ﬂooding, is the major source of destruction on land.
Although the damage inﬂicted by a hurricane diﬀers with the terrain it
encounters, the structural integrity of the buildings hit, the population den-
sity, the tide levels at the time of landfall, and the potential property damage
and ﬂooding expected along the coast can be estimated. Category 1 storms,
with winds of 74 to 95 mph, produce no real damage to building structures;
damage is limited primarily to unanchored mobile homes, shrubbery, and
trees. Some coastal road ﬂooding and minor pier damage may occur. Cate-
gory 2 storms (winds 96–110 mph) result in some rooﬁng material, door,
and window damage. Considerable devastation to vegetation, mobile
homes, and piers can be expected. Coastal and low-lying escape routes ﬂood
2 to 4 hours before the arrival of the center of the storm, and small craft in
unprotected anchorages break their moorings. Category 3 hurricanes (winds
547 HURRICANE DISASTER RESPONSE
111–130 mph) cause some structural damage to small residences and utility
buildings, with a minor amount of curtainwall (non–weight-bearing panels
suspended on the exterior of multistory structures between supporting col-
umns) failures. Mobile homes are destroyed. Flooding near the coast de-
stroys smaller structures, with larger structures damaged by ﬂoating
debris.

Terrain lower than 5 feet above sea level may be ﬂooded 8 miles
or more inland. As the winds increase to 131 to 155 mph (category 4),
more extensive curtainwall failures occur, with some complete roof structure
failure on small residences. Major erosion of the beach and major damage to
lower ﬂoors of structures near the shore can be expected. Terrain lower than
10 feet above sea level may be ﬂooded, requiring massive evacuation of res-
idential areas as far as 6 miles inland. Top-level hurricanes (category 5: sus-
tained winds O155 mph) produce complete roof failure on many residences
and industrial buildings. Some complete building failures, with small utility
buildings blown over or away, can be seen. Major damage occurs to lower
ﬂoors of all structures located less than 15 feet above sea level and within
500 yards of the shoreline, which may require massive evacuation of residen-
tial areas on low ground within 5 to 10 miles of the shoreline.
Prestorm medical issues
With current-day communications, an approaching storm should be
a surprise to no one. The National Hurricane Center, located in Miami,
Florida, tracks storms from their inception, and has performed well in pre-
dicting the power and anticipated landfall location of most recent storms.
With these predictions comes the ability to prepare, which for most involves
the accumulation of supplies (water, food, ﬂashlights, batteries), the secur-
ing of property (debris removal and placement of hurricane shutters), and
evacuation. An adequate supply of prescription medications and supplies
(syringes for diabetics, dressings for those who have recent wounds) must
be anticipated and obtained. For those planning to weather the storm at
home, placing these supplies in a safe room (away from windows and out-
side doors) should be done. Adequate supplies of fuel for personal vehicles
and generators (in the event of power loss) need to be obtained before the
storm arrives. These activities, representing only a partial list of the imme-
diate preparation required, produce a very stressful environment.
As anxiety levels mount, errors occur that can lead to medical emergen-
cies. Hurricane shutters can cause serious injury.

These shutters are made of
aluminum with very sharp edges and, in bulk, can be very heavy. Falling
shutters have resulted in extensive lacerations and even death from head in-
juries. As people rush to accomplish their goals, motor vehicle accidents are
also a concern.
As the storm approaches, emergency medical support disappears. Heli-
copters are typically grounded when wind speeds approach 45 mph. Opera -
tion of high-proﬁle ground ambulances becomes risky at wind speeds of
548 SHATZ et al
45 mph, and dispatch of ﬁre suppression units may terminate at wind speeds
of 55 mph. Persons who have serious illness and injuries at this point
become nontransportable.
Weathering the storm
The excitement of increasing winds and rain can be quickly replaced by
substantial concern when that rain becomes torrential and the winds rattle
structures. Fear that those structures may fail begins to mount. As power
lines are downed, communication with relatives and news agencies is lost,
and protective structures are left in darkness. Structures built to hurricane
standards often do well; however, for structures not typically in hurri-
cane-prone areas and those not built to the stringent standards of hurricane
building codes, structure failure can occur. Total roof failure exposes those
inside to ﬂying debris. Many have been injured or killed when falling trees
struck and collapsed houses. Reports of people wishing to go outside to ex-
perience the storm and being struck by ﬂying debris (often with fatal results)
are frequent.
Poststorm problems
As the storm passes, a sense of relief is quickly followed by one of awe or
one of despair at ﬁrst sight of the resulting damage. Here is where the real
medical problems begin.
Power outages may be limited to neighborhoods or entire counties, last-
ing hours to months. With the lack of power comes the loss of refrigeration
of food and medications, air conditioners, and lights. Those fortunate
enough to have generators (17.5% in Florida following hurricanes Charley,
Frances, Ivan, and Jeanne) [1] can spare some of these inconveniences, but
generators are a risk unto themselves.

Standard generators run on gasoline.
Spilling gasoline onto a hot engine while attempting to reﬁll the tank can
lead to a burned victim. Despite the seemingly appropriate placement of
generators away from living quarters, carbon monoxide is still a cause of
fatal and nonfatal poisonings after hurricanes. One hundred sixty-seven such
poisonings (including six fatalities) were treated in Florida in the aftermath
of the four hurricanes of the summer of 2004 [2]. Although common knowl-
edge might predict otherwise, 5% of those using generators placed them
indoors [2]. Fifty-one cases of carbon monoxide poisoning were reported
following Hurricane Katrina in 2005 in the states of Louisiana, Mississippi,
and Alabama. Burns resulting from alternate sources of heat for cooking,
such as barbeques and butane/propane stoves, are also frequent.
Downed power lines are also a source of injury. Contact with any struc-
tures charged by these lines leads to electrocution injury. In areas ﬂooded by
the storm, those entering the water to work or play are subject to lethal elec-
trocution if that water is energized by a downed power line.
549 HURRICANE DISASTER RESPONSE
Clearing and repairing the damage to one’s property can be arduous
work. As noted, hurricanes occur during the summer months when the
heat and humidity are at their highest. Many people are not accustomed
to heavy workloads in these environments and, as a result, suﬀer heat disor-
ders. Cardiac events also increase in frequency. Roof and tree damage leads
to people climbing to heights not frequented by most. Falls from roofs and
ladders are commonly seen in the aftermath of a storm. For some, only
a home remedy is required, but for others, the injury is a signiﬁcant lacera-
tion, fracture, or worse, brain injury or other form of life-threatening inter-
nal injury.
The debris after a hurricane is frequently in the form of shrubbery and
fallen trees. Clearing these often requires knives, handsaws, machetes, and
chain saws. Many people rent chain saws but have little or no experience
using them.

As one might imagine, a spectrum of lacerations, some quite
severe, results from the use of these tools.
Preparation is key
Preparation is the key to minimizing injury and death from the destruc-
tive forces of a hurricane; however, as witnessed in the days surrounding the
approach of Hurricanes Katrina and Rita toward the cities within Louisiana
and Texas, and Hurricane Wilma in Florida during the summer of 2005,
preparation can be formidable on a public health level. Evacuation plans
must include those unable to evacuate themselves, including the healthy
who do not have personal transportation and the residents and patients
of nursing homes, group homes, hospices, and hospitals. Despite mandatory
evacuation orders by local oﬃcials to those in predicted high-risk areas,
a signiﬁcant percentage of these residents do not heed these orders. As a re-
sult, call volumes for prehospital providers increase markedly. Although
some patients acquire only minor injuries, many suﬀer chronic problems
and have nowhere to go. The elderly are deposited in hospital emergency
departments by family members, expecting a safe refugedall this at a time
when the hospitals themselves may be trying to evacuate. As seen during the
hurricanes of 2005, many nursing homes had evacuation plans that included
agreements with transportation companies, but because those companies
had contracted with several nursing homes simultaneously, they did not
have the capability of evacuating all of the patients in time.
Hospital disaster plans usually include a plan to discharge or transfer less
acute patients to nonaﬀected facilities. Critical patients, however, are fre-
quently not able to be transferred due to their acuity, and are rightfully
left in place. Hurricanes can bring storm surges, heavy rains, and ﬂooding,
and hospitals with ground-based helipads are unable to evacuate patients by
air if those helipads are under water. Most hospitals have ground-level or
basement emergency generators that can similarly ﬂood and become nonop-
erational. Although the Joint Commission for the Accreditation of Health
550 SHATZ et al
Care Organizations requires that hospitals have fuel for those generators, no
minimum amount is speciﬁed.

The American Institute of Architects guide-
lines state that hospitals should have a minimal storage capacity to permit
continuous operation for at least 24 hours [3] in accordance with National
Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 99, NFPA 101, and NFPA 110. Flor-
ida Building Code speciﬁes a requirement for a fuel supply stored on-site to
fuel generators for 100% load for 72 hours of actual demand load for all
patient areas (Florida Building Code Section 419.4.2.9.2) for nursing homes
(Florida Building Code Section 420.3.25) and hospitals (Florida Building
Code Section 419.3.18). (NFPA 110 Section 2-2.3 requires a Class 48 gener-
ator, deﬁned as having a fuel tank size of 48 hours, with an additional 33%
over the 48 hours required as per Section 3-4.2.3. This requirement equates
to 64 hours of fuel, but for simplicity, 72 hours is the standard). What if
evacuation resources are not available until after that fuel is exhausted?
Some health care facilities in New Orleans following Hurricane Katrina
had accumulated a supply of food and water but had stored them in base-
ment facilities, only to have them destroyed by ﬂoodwaters [4]. Even gener-
ator power can fail, leaving ventilators that lack backup batteries without
a power source and, therefore, nonoperational. The usual 1:2 ICU nurse-
to-patient ratio suddenly becomes unmanageable when ventilated patients
require human-assisted ventilation with bag-valve-masks.
Special needs, hospice, nursing home, and hospitalized patients should
probably be evacuated in larger storms, but many older adults requiring
no special needs choose to remain in the area. During and after the storm,
however, barriers to medical care for pre-existing needs can prove fatal [5].
Food, water, and medications can be destroyed in the storm, and isolation
because of ﬂooding or area destruction can prevent access to medical care.
Because hurricanes tend to be summertime events, excessive heat can prove
to be fatal in those who have frail health.

As seen in Hurricane Katrina,
even those in a normal state of health can succumb to the high temperatures
produced in attics during attempts to escape rising ﬂoodwaters.
Although hospitals are on the high-priority list for restoration of support,
lower-proﬁle hospices, assisted living facilities, and skilled nursing facilities
are often delayed in regaining necessary power and supplies. Outpatient di-
alysis centers are another signiﬁcant area of need. Most hospitals are not
equipped to handle a large number of chronic dialysis patients if the outpa-
tient centers should become nonfunctional. For this reason, if advance
warning is available, these patients should be dialyzed at their respective
centers before the event occurs and be prepared to not be dialyzed for up
to 3 days after; adherence to a proper emergency renal diet is necessary
[6]. All Medicare-certiﬁed outpatient dialysis centers are required to have
at least one backup facility [7], and this information must be passed on to
the patients. Similar arrangements need to made for chemotherapy patients
and other chronic needs patients. Oxygen supplies for health care facilities
and those on home oxygen must also be kept current.
551 HURRICANE DISASTER RESPONSE
Coordination of the poststorm medical needs response should occur
through the local and state Emergency Operations Centers. Emergency
Support Function (ESF) 8 is the designated group within the disaster
response organization responsible for this coordination and should be
updated regularly with the functional status of all health care facilities
within the aﬀected areas. These facilities include all emergency medical ser-
vices ground and air systems, bed surge capacities of hospitals, burn beds,
acute care beds, skilled nursing and assisted living facilities, and a listing of
all blood centers, dialysis centers, and outpatient chemotherapy and radia-
tion centers.
Anticipation of blood needs is yet another task for hospitals. One of the
many challenges facing resumption of clinical surgical services is blood
product availability. All community-wide blood drives are usually sus-
pended, which means that all blood products need to be delivered from re-
mote locations.

This delay in delivery is especially problematic for platelets,
which have a shelf life of only 5 days.
Local and state disaster response
As outlined previously, hurricanes may pass into the history books as
nothing more than a stressful threat or as the most devastating natural di-
saster in United States history. The degree of poststorm response is dictated
by the degree of destruction.
Area hospital emergency rooms can quickly become busy. In the early
hours and days after the storm, many of the visits are for injuries. In the
authors’ experience, these patients can be taken to areas of the hospital
other than the emergency room (for instance, the recovery room if elective
surgical cases are suspended) in an eﬀort to oﬄoad the increasing surge on
the emergency department. Because hospital registration is often the bottle-
neck to rapid care, wounds can be triaged and addressed ﬁrst by surgeons
brought in speciﬁcally for this reason, patients can be given a supply of an-
tibiotics, and registration can be handled as the patients exit the area. In
any large-scale disaster, medical care must be streamlined and sometimes
inventive.
Medical licenses are issued by the state, which should allow personnel to
practice anywhere within that state. The limitations to outside physician and
nursing assistance, therefore, are at the individual hospital level. Emergency
suspension of the requirement of hospital privileges allows personnel from
unaﬀected areas to ﬁll positions in the hospital temporarily vacated by med-
ical personnel whose own lives have been disrupted by the storm. This
waiver allows for the reopening of hospitals and much needed medical
care in the immediate vicinity of the aﬀected area.
Knowledge of the operational status of near and distant area facilities
allows for expedited transfer or transport of patients to functional medical
care facilities. Figs. 1 and 2 from the Department of Health and Human
552 SHATZ et al
Fig. 1. Operational status of hospitals by state following Hurricane Katrina/Rita. (From US
Department of Health and Human Services, Washington, DC.)
Services Critical Infrastructure Data System demonstrate the local, state,
and national availability of medical care for hurricane victims following
Hurricane Rita in 2005.

A means of rapidly assessing the needs of the
aﬀected area also allows proper resource deployment and use [8].
Federal disaster assistance
In December 2004, the National Response Plan (NRP) [9] became oper-
ational, with a 4-month phase-in period, after which the previous Federal
Response Plan, the US Government Domestic Terrorism Concept of
Operations Plan, and the Federal Radiological Emergency Response Plan
became obsolete. This document, based on the National Incident Manage-
ment System, provides a framework within which disaster response can
operate at all levels (local, state, tribal, federal, private sector, and nongov-
ernmental organizations) and is designed to function in an all-hazards envi-
ronment. With this plan comes deﬁnitions of roles and responsibilities of key
authorities.
Although hurricanes allow for more planning and preparation than other
natural disasters, much of the initial poststorm response lies in the hands of
local authorities who are usually ﬁrst on scene. This response includes an
initial damage assessment, the subsequent restoration of power outages,
553 HURRICANE DISASTER RESPONSE
Fig. 2. Operational status of hospitals during Hurricane Rita. (From US Department of Health
and Human Services, Washington, DC.)
the clearing of roads to allow the safe movement of traﬃc and rescue per-
sonnel, and the establishment of a law enforcement presence to prevent un-
lawful acts. In the event that local resources are overwhelmed, state
assistance is requested. As outlined in the NRP, the governor, as the state’s
chief executive oﬃcer, is responsible for coordinating the state’s resources
‘‘to address the full spectrum of actions to prevent, prepare for, respond
to, and recover from incidents in an all-hazards context’’ [9]. If and when
it becomes clear that state assets have been exceeded or exhausted, federal
assistance can be requested by the governor. The process for this request
and assistance is outlined in the Robert T. Staﬀord Disaster Relief and As-
sistance Act [10]. This federal assistance can be extensive and can include
medical care.
Within the NRP are 15 ESFs.

These ESFs, in their partial or full activa-
tion, provide a coordinated assistance mechanism for local, state, and tribal
governments for recovery from any and all disasters. Two of these 15 ESFs
provide medical assistance. Activation of ESF 9 (Urban Search and Rescue)
mobilizes elite teams trained in the specialized area of heavy structure col-
lapse. These teams provide primarily search and rescue capabilities but in-
clude a component of medical personnel for the treatment of rescued
victims; however, their supplies and capabilities are limited. Within ESF 8
(Public Health and Medical Services) is the National Disaster Medical
554 SHATZ et al
System and the network of Disaster Medical Assistance Teams (DMATs).
These DMATs consist of medical personnel from all areas of emergency
medical care, including physicians, nurses, radiology and respiratory ther-
apy technicians, and laboratory personnel. These teams deploy with their
personnel and equipment and are capable of independent function as a ﬁeld
hospital in a parking lot or in ﬁlling personnel positions in existing hospitals.
These teams were used extensively in the hurricanes of 2004 and especially
in those of 2005. Over 64,000 patients were treated by the deployed DMAT
teams in the 6 weeks following the landfall of Hurricanes Katrina and Rita
in 2005 [11]. Military assets have also been successfully deployed following
major storms [12] and can provide supplies, air support, manpower, and law
enforcement resources.
The future
Every disaster carries with it new challenges that have never been seen or
perhaps never been considered. As such, every disaster provides a teaching
environment from which we can and should learn. Hurricane Katrina pro-
vided a signiﬁcant classroom from which we can change future policy.
Few disasters in the United States have brought the infrastructure of an
entire city to its knees as occurred in New Orleans in the summer of 2005.
Few have produced the numbers of victims of that storm. A considerable
amount of time and brainpower has been devoted over the years to preparing
for disasters, but more postincident planning should be stressed. Although
communication has long been a recognized problem in the postdisaster set-
ting, transportation becomes a formidable issue in a large-scale disaster
that aﬀects thousands and eliminates the basic support structures.

Before
and after a storm, huge numbers of people must be evacuated by public
and private transportation. Even those who heed evacuation demands ﬁnd
themselves caught in interminable traﬃc jams. Eﬀective plans that allow
for proper evacuation must be developed, and adequate numbers of vehicles
used for postevent evacuation must be rapidly mobilized.
After victims are removed from immediate danger, they are frequently
deposited in areas while awaiting deﬁnitive evacuation. Mass care of these
potential thousands must be prepared for. Casualty collection points must
be identiﬁed before the event and must be staﬀed and equipped properly
with basic-needs medical care. These collection points can range in function
from treatment areas to morgues. Mass casualty triage must be used eﬀec-
tively. Although most physicians are accustomed to treating the most severely
sick and injured ﬁrst, it is diﬃcult for this practice to happen in these settings.
Those in need of advanced medical care may fall into triage categories in
which care will not be rendered, and physicians must be trained to deal with
this scenario. Shelters should be identiﬁed for prestorm evacuees and the
potential hundreds or thousands displaced from their homes after the storm.
555 HURRICANE DISASTER RESPONSE
Summary
The preparation and rebuilding in the wake of a devastating hurricane
can be a challenge at all levels. The summer of 2004 proved how frequently
these preparations might need to happen, and the hurricanes of 2005 dem-
onstrated how extensive these preparations should be and the cost of inad-
equate preparation. Medical care is a very large component of the disaster
plan for hurricanes and must include not only supplies but also personnel.
Personal and professional limitations can impede the response of valuable
personnel to distant sites, but one must remember that the local response
falls in the hands of those ﬁrst on site (ie, those who reside in the area).
Proper planning and eﬀective drills can mitigate the extent of damage to
structures and human life, and when deemed necessary, eﬀective evacuation
of at-risk areas is crucial.

In the end, nature is much too powerful a force for
us to ﬁghtdwe can only be prepared to respond to and bend with the po-
tentially devastating forces directed our way.
References
[1] Epidemiologic assessment of the impact of four hurricanes dFlorida, 2004. MMWR Morb
Mortal Wkly Rep 2005;54(28):693–7.
[2] Carbon monoxide poisoning from hurricane-associated use of portable generators dFlorida,
2004. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2005;54(28):697–700.
[3] Guidelines for design and construction of hospital and health care facilities. Washington,
DC: American Institute of Architects; 2001. Chapter 7.
[4] Rohde D, McNeil DG, Abelson R, et al. Storm and crisis. The victims: vulnerable, and
doomed in the storm. New York Times. Section A, page 1, column 1. September 19, 2005.
[5] Rapid assessment of the needs and health status of older adults after Hurricane Charleyd
Charlotte, DeSoto, and Hardee Counties, Florida, August 27–31, 2004. MMWR Morb
Mortal Wkly Rep 2004;53(36):837–40.
[6] Preparing for emergencies: a guide for people on dialysis: Department of Health and Hu-
man Services, Center for Medicare and Medicated Services; 2002. Publication #CMS
10150. Available at: http://new.cms.hhs.gov/MLNProducts/downloads/10150.pdf or http://
medicare.gov/Publications/Pubs/pdf/10150.pdf . Accessed March 29, 2006.
[7] Code of Federal Regulations, Title 42, Volume 2, Section 405.2160, Conditions for Coverage
of Suppliers of End-Stage Renal Disease (ESRD) Services–Aﬃliation agreement or arrange-
ment. Revised October 1, 2003. U.S. Government Printing Oﬃce. Washington DC.
[8] Waring S, Zakos-Feliberti A, Wood R, et al.

The utility of geographic information systems
(GIS) in rapid epidemiological assessments following weather-related disasters: methodo-
logical issues based on the Tropical Storm Allison experience. Int J Hyg Environ Health
2005;208(1–2):109–16.
[9] National Response Plan. Available at: http://www.dhs.gov/interweb/assetlibrary/
NRP_FullText.pdf . Accessed March 29, 2006.
[10] Robert T. Staﬀord Disaster Relief and Assistance Act. Pub L No. 93-288, 88 Stat 143 (1974)
(codiﬁed as amended at 42 USC x5121-5206, and scattered sections of 12 USC, 16 USC, 20
USC, 26 USC, 38 USC [2002]).
[11] National Disaster Medical System Resource Status Report, October 15, 2005.
[12] D’Amore AR, Hardin CK. Air Force expeditionary medical support unit at the Houston
ﬂoods: use of a military model in civilian disaster response. Mil Med 2005;170(2):103–8.

