Preparing
for Disaster
Where Will You or Your Family Be When a
Disaster Strikes?
You could be anywhere – at work, at school or in the car. How will you find
each other? Will you know if your children are safe?
Emergencies and disasters can strike quickly and without warning and can
force you to evacuate your neighborhood or confine you to your home.
What would you do if basic services — water, gas, electricity or telephones
— were cut off?
Local officials and relief workers will be on the scene after a disaster, but
they cannot reach everyone right away.
You can cope with disaster by preparing in advance and by working with your
family as a team. Follow the steps listed in this booklet to be prepared.
 1. Get informed
 2. Make a plan
 3. Assemble a kit
 4. Maintain your plan and kit
Knowing what to do is your best protection and your responsibility .
2 Four Steps to Preparedness
1. G ET INFORMED
Contact your local emergency management office or local American
Red Cross Chapter to gather the information you will need to create
a plan.
 Community Hazards
Ask about the specific hazards that threaten your community (e.g.
hurricanes, tornados, and earthquakes) and about your risk from those
hazards. Additionally, hazard information for your local area can be
obtained at .
 Community Disaster Plans
Learn about community response plans, evacuation plans, and
designated emergency shelters. Ask about the emergency plans and
procedures that exist in places you and your family spend time such as
places of employment, schools, and child care centers. If you do not
own a vehicle or drive, find out in advance what your community’s
plans are for evacuating those without private transportation.
Community Warning Systems
Find out how local authorities will warn you of a pending disaster
and how they will
provide information
to you during and
after a disaster.
Learn about NOAA
Weather Radio
and its alerting
capabilities
(www.noaa.go v).
32. M AKE A PLAN
 Meet with Y our Family Members . Review the information you
gathered about community hazards and plans. Explain the dangers
to children and work with them as a team to prepare your family.

Be
sure to include caregivers in your meeting and planning efforts.
 Choose an "Out-of-Town" Contact. Ask an out-of-town friend
or relative to be your contact. Following a disaster, family members
should call this person and tell them where they are. Everyone must
know the contact's phone numbers. After a disaster, it is often easier
to make a long distance call than a local call from a disaster area.
 Decide Where to Meet. In the event of an emergency, you may
become separated from family members. Choose a place right
outside your home in case of a sudden emergency, like a fire.
Choose a location outside your neighborhood in case you can't
return home.
 Complete a Family Communication Plan. Your plan should
include contact information for family members, work and school.
Your plan should also include information for your out-of-town
contact, meeting locations, emergency services and the National
Poison Control Center (1-800-222-1222). A sample form for
recording this information can be found at www.ready.go v - or at
www.redcross.org /contactcard . These websites also provide blank
wallet cards on which contact information can be recorded and
carried in a wallet, purse, backpack, etc., for quick reference. Teach
your children how to call the emergency phone numbers and when
it is appropriate to do so. Be sure each family member has a copy
of your communication plan and post it near your telephone for use
in an emergency.
 Escape Routes and Safe Places. In a fire or other emergency, you
may need to evacuate on a moment’s notice. Be ready to get out
fast. Be sure everyone in your family knows the best escape routes
out of your home as well as where the safe places are in your home
for each type of disaster (i.e., if a tornado approaches, go to the
basement or the lowest floor of your home or an interior room or
closet with no windows).
4Use a blank sheet of paper to draw floor plans of your home. Show
the location of doors, windows, stairways, large furniture, your
disaster supplies kit, fire extinguisher, smoke alarms, collapsible
ladders, first-aid kits, and utility shut-off points.

Show important
points outside such as garages, patios, stairways, elevators,
driveways, and porches. See illustration below.
 Indicate at least two escape routes from each room, and mark a
place outside of the home where household members should
meet in case of ﬁ  re. If you or someone in your household uses a
wheelchair, make all exits from your home wheelchair accessible.
 Practice emergency evacuation drills at least two times a year, but
as often as you update your escape plan.
5 Plan for those with disabilities and other special needs. Keep
support items in a designated place, so they can be found quickly.
For those who have home-health caregivers, particularly for those
who are bed-bound, it is essential to have an alternate plan if the
home-health caregiver cannot make it to you. In advance, provide
the power company with a list of all power-dependent life support
equipment required by family members. Develop a contingency
plan that includes an alternate power source for the equipment or
relocating the person.
 Plan for your pets. Take your pets with you if you evacuate.
However, be aware that pets (other than service animals) usually
are not permitted in emergency public shelters for health reasons.
Prepare a list of family, friends, boarding facilities, veterinarians,
and “pet-friendly” hotels that could shelter your pets in an
emergency.
 Prepare for different hazards. Include in your plan how to
prepare for each hazard that could impact your local community
and how to protect yourself. For instance, the actions you would
take to protect yourself from a tornado are different from those
you would for a fire. Reference the websites listed on the back
cover to learn more about the different actions required for
different hazards.
6 Action Checklist – Items To Do Before a Disaster
 Utilities
 Know how and when to turn off water, gas and electricity at the main
switches or valves and share this information with your family and
caregivers. Keep any tools you will need near gas and water shut off
valves.

Turn off the utilities only if you suspect the lines are damaged,
you suspect a leak or if local officials instruct you to do so.
 (Note: Gas shut-off procedure - As part of the learning process, do
not actually turn off the gas. If the gas is turned off for any reason,
only a qualiﬁed professional can turn it back on. It might take several
weeks for a professional to respond. In the meantime, you will require
alternate sources to heat your home, make hot water, and cook.)
 Fire Extinguisher
 Be sure everyone knows how to use your fire extinguishers (ABC
type) and where they are kept.
 Smoke Alarms
 Install smoke alarms on each level of your home, especially near
the bedrooms. Individuals with sensory disabilities should consider
installing smoke alarms that have strobe lights and vibrating pads.
Follow local codes and manufacturer’s instructions about installation
requirements. Also, consider installing a carbon monoxide alarm in
your home.
 Insurance Coverage
 Check if you have adequate insurance coverage. Homeowners
insurance does not cover flood damage and may not provide full
coverage for other hazards. Talk with your insurance agent and make
sure you have adequate coverage to protect your family against
financial loss.
 First Aid/CPR & AED (Automated External Defibrillation)
 Take American Red Cross first aid and CPR/AED classes. Red Cross
courses can accommodate people with disabilities. Discuss your
needs when registering for the classes.
7 Inventory Home Possessions
 Make a record of your possessions to help you claim reimbursement
in case of loss or damage. Store this information in a safe deposit box
or other secure (flood/fire safe) location to ensure the records survive
a disaster. Include photographs or video of the interior and exterior of
your home as well as cars, boats and recreational vehicles. Also, have
photos of durable medical equipment and be sure to make a record
of the make and model numbers for each item. Get professional
appraisals of jewelry, collectibles, artwork, or other items that may
be difficult to evaluate.

Make copies of receipts and canceled checks
showing the cost for valuable items.
 Vital Records and Documents
 Vital family records and other important documents such as birth and
marriage certificates, social security cards, passports, wills, deeds,
and financial, insurance, and immunizations records should be kept
in a safe deposit box or other safe location.
 Reduce Home Hazards
 In a disaster, ordinary items in the home can cause injury and damage.
Take these steps to reduce your risk.
 Have a professional repair defective electrical wiring and leaky
gas connections.
 Place large, heavy objects on lower shelves and hang pictures and
mirrors away from beds.
 Use straps or other restraints to secure tall cabinets, bookshelves,
large appliances (especially water heater, furnace, and refrigerator),
mirrors, shelves, large picture frames, and light fixtures to wall
studs.
 Repair cracks in ceilings and foundations.
 Store weed killers, pesticides, and flammable products away from
heat sources.
 Place oily rags or waste in covered metal cans and dispose of
them according to local regulations.
 Have a professional clean and repair chimneys, flue pipes,
connectors, and gas vents.
8 3. A SSEMBLE  A DISASTER  SUPPLIES  KIT
In the event you need to evacuate at a moment’s notice and take essentials
with you, you probably will not have the opportunity to shop or search
for the supplies you and your family will need. Every household should
assemble a disaster supplies kit and keep it up to date.
A disaster supplies kit is a collection of basic items a family would
probably need to stay safe and be more comfortable during and after
a disaster. Disaster supplies kit items should be stored in a portable
container(s) as close as possible to the exit door. Review the contents
of your kit at least once per year or as your family needs change.

Also,
consider having emergency supplies in each vehicle and at your place
of employment.
 Three-day supply of nonperishable food and manual can opener.
 Three-day supply of water (one gallon of water per person, per day).
 Portable, battery-powered radio or television and extra batteries.
 Flashlight and extra batteries.
 First aid kit and manual.
 Sanitation and hygiene items (hand sanitizer, moist towelettes,
  and toilet paper).
 Matches in waterproof container.
 Whistle.
 Extra clothing and blankets.
 Kitchen accessories and cooking utensils.
 Photocopies of identification and credit cards.
 Cash and coins.
 Special needs items such as prescription medications, eye glasses,
  contact lens solution, and hearing aid batteries.
 Items for infants, such as formula, diapers, bottles, and pacifiers.
 Tools, pet supplies, a map of the local area, and other items to meet
  your unique family needs.
If you live in a cold climate, you must think about warmth. It is possible
that you will not have heat during or after a disaster. Think about your
clothing and bedding needs. Be sure to include one set of the following
for each person:
 Jacket or coat.
 Long pants and long sleeve shirt.
  Sturdy shoes.
 Hat, mittens, and scarf.
 Sleeping bag or warm blanket.
9 Supplies for your vehicle include:
 Flashlight, extra batteries, and maps.
 First aid kit and manual.
 White distress flag.
 Tire repair kit, booster/jumper cables, pump, and flares.
 Bottled water and non-perishable foods such as granola bars.
 Seasonal supplies: Winter - blanket, hat, mittens, shovel, sand, tire chains,
windshield scraper, florescent distress flag; Summer – sunscreen lotion
(SPF 15 or greater), shade item (umbrella, wide brimmed hat, etc).
4.

M AINTAIN  YOUR PLAN
Quiz:  Review your plan every six months and quiz your family about
what to do.
Drill : Conduct fire and emergency evacuation drills on a regular basis
with your family.
Restock : Check food supplies for expiration dates and discard, or replace
stored water and food every six months.
Test: Read the indicator on your fire extinguisher(s) and follow the
manufacturer's instructions to recharge. Test your smoke alarms monthly and
change the batteries at least once a year. Replace alarms every 10 years.
10If Disaster Strikes
If you are instructed to take shelter immediately , do so at once
If you are instructed to evacuate
 Listen to the radio or television for the location of emergency shelters
and for other instructions from local emergency officials.
 Wear protective clothing and sturdy shoes.
 Take your disaster supplies kit.
 Use travel routes specified by local authorities and don't use shortcuts
because certain areas may be impassable or dangerous.
After a disaster
 Administer first aid and get help for seriously injured people.
 If the emergency occurs while you are at home, check for damage using a
flashlight. Do not light matches or candles or turn on electrical switches.
 Check for fires, electrical, and other household hazards. Spilled
bleaches, gasoline, and other liquids may produce deadly fumes when
chemicals mix, or be a fire hazard. Contact your local fire department
for information on how to clean up spilled chemicals.
 Sniff for gas leaks, starting at the water heater. If you smell gas or
suspect a leak, turn off the main gas valve, open windows, and get
everyone outside quickly.
 Shut off any damaged utilities.
 Check on your neighbors, especially those who are elderly or disabled.
11 Call your out-of-town contact — do not use the telephone again unless
it is a life-threatening emergency.
 Stay away from downed power lines.
 Listen to local radio and TV for information about where you can get
disaster relief assistance.
If electrical power is lost
 Call your local power company.
 Use a flashlight or battery-operated lantern. Do not use candles for
emergency lighting.

Candles and kerosene lanterns are fire hazards.
 Turn off all major appliances. They could overload electric lines when
power is restored, causing a second outage.
 Keep refrigerator and freezer doors closed as much as possible. Food
can be kept cold for a day or two if the doors are kept closed.
 Use portable generators cautiously. Make sure they are operated only
out-of-doors  in a well-ventilated area. Refuel a generator only after
it has cooled. Do not connect a generator to your home’s electrical
system except though an approved transfer switch installed in
compliance with local electrical code.
 In cold weather, drain pumps, supply lines, water heaters, and boilers
can freeze when the power is lost. Traps in drains of tubs, sinks,
commodes, washing machines, and dishwashers can also freeze. To
avoid burst pipes, close the main water valve and open the spigots and
supply lines and drain them.
 Learn More
The Federal Emergency Management Agency’s Community and
Family Preparedness Program and American Red Cross Community
Disaster Education are nationwide efforts to help people prepare for
disasters of all types.
For more information, please contact your local emergency management
office or American Red Cross chapter. This booklet and the preparedness
materials listed below are online at  www.fema.go v and www.redcross.
org. Other preparedness materials are available at these sites, as well as
at www.ready.go v.
These publications are also available by calling FEMA at
1-800-480-2520, or writing:
  FEMA
  P.O. Box 2012
  Jessup, MD 20794-2012
Publications with an “A” number are available from your local
American Red Cross chapter.
  Are Y ou Ready?

An In-depth Guide to Citizen Preparedness (IS-22)
  Helping Children Cope with Disaster (FEMA 478) (A4499)
  Preparing for Disaster  for People with Disabilities and other
  Special Needs (FEMA 476)  (A4497)
  Food and Water in an Emergency (FEMA 477) (A5055)
Local sponsorship provided by:
FEMA 475
A4600
August 2004

