BE PREPARED FOR A
TSUNAMI
FEMA V-1011/May 2018A tsunami can kill or injure
people and damage or
destroy buildings and
infrastructure as waves
come in and go out.
A tsunami is a series of
enormous ocean waves
caused by earthquakes,
underwater landslides,
volcanic eruptions,
or asteroids.Travels 20–30 miles
per hour with waves
10–100 feet highCauses flooding, and creates
problems with transportation,
power, communications, and
drinking waterCan happen anywhere along
U.S. coasts. Coasts that border
the Pacific Ocean or Caribbean
have the greatest risk20-30
mph
IF YOU ARE UNDER A TSUNAMI WARNING
If caused by an earthquake, Drop, Cover, and Hold On
to protect yourself from the earthquake first.
Get to high ground as far
inland as possible.
Be alert to signs of a tsunami,
such as a sudden rise or
draining of ocean waters.Listen to emergency
information and alerts.
Evacuate: DO NOT wait! Leave when you see any natural signs
of a tsunami OR hear an official
tsunami warning.
If you are in a boat, go out to sea.
HOW TO STAY SAFE
WHEN A TSUNAMI THREATENS
Prepare
NOW
If you live near or visit a coastal
area, learn about the tsunami risk. Some at-risk communities have
maps with evacuation zones and
routes. If you are a visitor, ask about community emergency plans.
Learn the signs of a potential
tsunami, such as an earthquake, a
loud roar from the ocean, or unusual ocean behavior, such as a sudden rise or wall of water or sudden draining showing the ocean floor.
Know and practice community
evacuation plans and map out your routes from home, work, and play. Pick shelters 100 feet or more above
sea level or at least one mile inland.
Create a family emergency
communication plan that has an
out-of-state contact. Plan where to meet if you get separated.
Sign up for your community’s
warning system.

The Emergency Alert
System (EAS) and National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA) Weather Radio also provide
emergency alerts.
Consider earthquake insurance and
a flood insurance policy through the National Flood Insurance Program
(NFIP). Standard homeowner’s
insurance does not cover flood or earthquake damage.Survive
DURING
If you are in a tsunami area and there is an earthquake, first protect yourself from the earthquake. Drop,
Cover, and Hold On. Drop to your
hands and knees. Cover your head and neck with your arms. Hold on to any sturdy furniture until the shaking
stops. Crawl only if you can reach
better cover, but do not go through an area with more debris.
When the shaking stops, if there is
a warning, either natural signs or an
official warning, move immediately to
a safe place as high and as far inland as possible. Listen to the authorities, but do not wait for tsunami warnings
and evacuation orders.
If you are outside of the tsunami
hazard zone and receive a warning,
stay where you are unless officials tell you otherwise.
Leave immediately if you are told to
do so. Evacuation routes are often
marked by a wave with an arrow in the direction of higher ground.
If you are in the water, grab onto
something that floats, such as a raft, tree trunk, or door.
If you are in a boat, face the direction
of the waves and head out to sea. If
you are in a harbor, go inland. Be Safe
AFTER
Listen to local alerts and authorities
for information on areas to avoid and shelter locations.
Avoid wading in floodwater, which
can contain dangerous debris. Water may be deeper than it appears.
Be aware of the risk of electrocution.
Underground or downed power lines
can electrically charge water. Do not touch electrical equipment if it is wet or if you are standing in water.
Stay away from damaged buildings,
roads, and bridges.
Document property damage with
photographs. Conduct an inventory and contact your insurance company
for assistance.
Save phone calls for emergencies.
Phone systems are often down
or busy after a disaster.

Use text
messages or social media to
communicate with family and friends.
Take an Active Role
in Your Safety
Go to Ready.gov/tsunamis.
Download the FEMA app to
get more information about
preparing for a tsunami.
FEMA V-1011

