BE PREPARED FOR AN
EARTHQUAKE
FEMA V-1003/May 2018Earthquakes can collapse
buildings and cause heavy
items to fall, resulting in
injuries and property damage.
Earthquakes are the
sudden, rapid shaking of
the earth, caused by the
breaking and shifting of
underground rock. Can happen anywhere. Higher
risk areas are California, Alaska,
and the Mississippi ValleyGive no
warningCause fires and
damage roadsCause tsunamis,
landslides, and
avalanches
IF AN EARTHQUAKE HAPPENS,
PROTECT YOURSELF RIGHT AWAY
If in a vehicle,
pull over and stop.If in bed,
stay there.If outdoors,
stay outdoors.Do not get in
a doorway.Do not run
outside.
HOW TO STAY SAFE
WHEN AN EARTHQUAKE THREATENS
Prepare
NOW
Secure items such as televisions and
objects that hang on walls. Store heavy and breakable objects on low
shelves.
Practice Drop, Cover, and Hold On
with family and coworkers. Drop to your hands and knees. Cover your
head and neck with your arms. Crawl
only as far as needed to reach cover from falling materials. Hold on to any sturdy furniture until the shaking stops.
Create a family emergency
communication plan that has an out-of-state contact. Plan where to meet if you get separated.
Make a supply kit that includes
enough food and water for several
days, a flashlight, a fire extinguisher,
and a whistle. Consider each person’s
specific needs, including medication.
Do not forget the needs of pets.
Have extra batteries and charging devices for phones and other critical equipment.
Consider earthquake insurance
policies. Standard homeowner’s insurance does not cover earthquake damage.
Consider a retrofit of your building
if it has structural issues that make
it vulnerable to collapse during an earthquake.Survive
DURING
Drop, Cover, and Hold On like you practiced. Drop to your hands and knees. Cover your head and neck
with your arms. Hold on to any
sturdy furniture until the shaking stops.

Crawl only if you can reach better cover without going through
an area with more debris.
If in bed, stay there and cover your
head and neck with a pillow.
If inside, stay there until the shaking
stops. DO NOT run outside.
If in a vehicle, stop in a clear
area that is away from buildings, trees, overpasses, underpasses, or utility wires.
If you are in a high-rise building,
expect fire alarms and sprinklers to
go off. Do not use elevators.
If near slopes, cliffs, or mountains,
be alert for falling rocks and
landslides.Be Safe
AFTER
Expect aftershocks to follow the
largest shock of an earthquake sequence.
Check yourself for injury.
If in a damaged building, go
outside and quickly move away from the building.
Do not enter damaged buildings.
If you are trapped, send a text or
bang on a pipe or wall. Cover your mouth for protection and instead of shouting, use a whistle.
If you are in an area that may
experience tsunamis, go inland or to higher ground immediately after the shaking stops.
Save phone calls for emergencies.
Wear sturdy shoes and work gloves.
Take an Active
Role in Your Safety
Go to Ready.gov/
earthquakes. Download
the FEMA app to get
more information
about preparing for an
earthquake.
FEMA V-1003

